Enqland and Wales
App
47:4,
'/-89E
DOI
TEE655E060ZS
Tolink tothis article:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1060132090353933f
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the *Content") contained
Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and
are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon al
any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoevei
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of
the Content
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sublicensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
www.tandfonline.com/page/te:ms-and-conditions
Journalof Macromolecular Science,PartA:Pure and
AppliedChemistry
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription inforrmation:
om/loi/Lmsa2 0
Self-emulsifying Hydroxy AcrylicPolymer Dispersions
Polyurethane Coatings
Xia Kong ", Shaomao Li *, Jinqing Qu * & Huanqin Chen *
 Aborouoa go Ansreanun euuo qinos ' buraaurug reoau pue Assuau jo jooqos 。
Guangzhou, 510640, China
Published online: 12 Feb 2010
LL
Self-emulsifyingHydroxyAcrylicPolymerDispersionsfor
TwoComponentWaterbornePolyurethaneCoatings
XIAKONG.SHAOMAOLI.JINOINGOU*andHUANOIN CHEN
Received August 2009, Accepted September 2009
Novel self-emulsifying acrylic polymer aqueous dispersions (NPAD) for two component waterborne polyurethane coatings (2K-
WPU) were prepared by the emulsification of self-emulsifying polymer blends in water, which the polymer blends typically consist
p  () s es o aod  s o  ( rod  dn es e si aoiod e o o
light scattering (DLS) analysis showed that the NPAD have a bimodal particle size distribution and the particle diameters can be
controlled by the amount of salt group containing polymer and the concentration of salt groups in this polymer. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) images also testified that the NPADs possess small particles consisted of P1 and core-shell structure large particles
which are composed of the P1 in the shell parts and the P2 in the core parts, The property comparisons of the NPAD, conventional
polyacrylic dispersion (CPAD) and poylacrylic emulsion (PAE) for 2K-WPU disclosed that the NPADs possess higher solid contents
up to 45 wt% and much lower carboxy salt contents than those of the CPAD, and the NPAD-based 2K-WPU films display much
better performance including 90% of the gloss, 0.81 of the pendulum hardness, much better solvent- and water-resistance than those
of the CPAD and PAE. The TGA curves indicated the NPAD-based 2K-WPU films display good thermal stability.
0 0 60 60:  [s ] q ppmo
1 Introduction
Polyurethane (PU) coatings possess excellent properties
and have established an important place in the coatings
industry due to their micro-phase separated domains from
immiscibility of soft and hard blocks, hydrogen bond-
ing, and chemically induced separation of urethane-rich
and urea-rich domains (13). Among them, the two com-
ponent solvent-borne PU coatings display a maximum
performance and appearance which satisfied the main
market requirements Due to increasingly stringent legal
requirements, two component waterborne polyurethane
coatings (2K-WPU) have become increasingly popular
over the last several years, driven by market demands
for higher-performance, formaldehyde free, thermosetting
water-based coatings (4).
basic
componentsof2K-WPU
systems
are
hydroxy-functional waterborne polymer
(polyol),
an
amethylene disocyanate (HDI)or
isophorone diiso-
eqdopq oq iou Ke 1o Keu u (Id) sues
modified, optional co-solvent(s), and water (5).
Various
ogy, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: cejqqu@scut.edu.cn
types of hydroxy-functional waterborne polymers includ-
ing polyester, polyacrylate, polyurethane, and their hybrids
can be used in 2K-WPU systems (6). Among them, water-
borne acrylic polymers get more attentions because of their
excellent resistance to hydrolysis and low cost (7). These
are two kinds of hydroxy-functional waterborne acrylic
polymers differ in preparation methods (8), namely, acrylic
polymer emulsions (PAE) and acrylic polymer dispersions
(PAD) (9). The PAE possess high molecular weight and
glass transition temperature give PAE-based 2K-WPU film
rapid physical drying properties at room temperature before
the onset of chemical crosslinking. However, it is difficult
to achieve an acceptable film appearance and fulfil most
of customer needs due to some remaining surfactants and
protective colloids in the drying films which come from the
PAE (10). Thus, PADs are free of any surfactants and pro-
tective colloids, the high concentration of hydrophilic acid
groups in PADs often lead to a decrease in water-/ethanol-
resistance properties of the film (11). much research had
focused on overcoming the disadvantages including car-
boxyl groups in the acrylic polymers could be crosslinked
by aziridine, polycarbodimides and their derivatives (12,
13). On the other hand, the decreasing of the hydrophilic
salt group contents in the polymers also lead to hydropho-
bic films, this would be a good method.
a new preparation
 0 60 60:  [s ] q 
(NPAD), namely, the preparation of self-emulsifying poly-
mer blends, which consist of two polymers which differed
in their salt group contents, and only one of the polymers
contains the salt groups, which are required for the stabi-
lization of the dispersions. The synthetic process was listed
in Scheme 1. The properties of the NPAD, conventional
acrylic polymer dispersion (CPAD) and PAE for 2K-WPU
coatings were also compared.
2 Experimental
2.1 Material
Methacrylic acid (MAA), methyl methacrylate (MMA),
butyl acrylate (BA), styrene (St), and hydroxypropyl
methacrylate (HPMA) are all commercial products pur-
chased from Mitsui Co. (Japan). Dodecyl mercaptan,
2, 2-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN), dimethylethanolamine
(DMEA), and acetone are provided by Guangdong Car-
poly Chemical CO., Ltd. (Jiangmen, China). Hydrophilic
modified polyisocyanurate based on HDI trimers (Bayhy-
dur XP2655) was purchased from Bayer CO. (German). All
the materials were used without further purification.
2.2 Measuremcnts
2.2.1. Particle sizes and distributions
Particle sizes and distributions were measured using a dy-
namic light scattering (DLS) technique (Malvern Laser
Particle Sizer). Samples were diluted with water into an
appropriate concentration as indicated by the instrument.
Test specification: 0.6-6000 nm; temperature: 25° C
determine the particle morphologies, TEM were acquired
on a Zeiss EM 109T microscope using an accelerating volt-
deionized water followed by casting
copper grids (Ted Pella, Inc.)
2.2.2.Film property measurements
Dry times were determined using an automatic drying time
recorder on the glass panel according to GB/T 17281989;
gloss was read directly at 60° on the glass panel using a
glossmeter (GB/T 97541988); the hardness was tested
with a pencil (provided by Zhonghua Pencil Factory in
Shanghai, China) having a different hardness on a glass
panel (GB/T173093); the adhesion was determined using
the cross-hatch method at a distance of 1 mm on tinplate
(GB/T92861998); the flexibility was tested with a T-bend
tester (GB/T 97552001); and the impact resistance was
measured with an impact tester on a tinplate; refer to the
GB/T 4893.91992.
2.2.3.Water/ethanolUptake
A known weight (Wj) of a dried polymer film (60 mm x
60 mm × 1 mm) was immersed in a distilled water bath
for 8 days for water uptake, or immersed in an ethanol
(95%) bath for 48 h for ethanol absorption, followed by
wiping off the surface water or ethanol with a piece of filter
paper to determined the weight W, three measurements
were averaged for each sample. The percentage of the water
and the ethanol uptake were calculated according to the
following equations:
where Wx and Wg are the water and ethanol absorption
respectively.
2.2.4.Gel contents ofthe filn
The crosslinking degree of 2K-WPU films was determined
with gel contents and evaluated on the basis of swelling
experiments using 2K-WPU films, which were dried at 25°C
for 3 days, followed by annealing latex films at 50° C for 4 h.
2K-WPU films (0.10.2 g, H§) were immersed in acetone
for 48 h at room temperature. Samples were reweighed after
drying at 50°C for 24 h (W4), and the gel content (α) was
determined using the following equation:
2.2.5.IR analysis
The infrared (IR) spectra were recorded with a Spectrum
2000 FTIR instrument in the 4004000 cm" region. A
NPAD and a mixed 2K-WPU paint were coated directly on
to the surface of a KBr crystal, respectively, and measured
after film forming and drying (a simple IR measurement
method for liquid sample)
0 aq0 60 60: 1e [1su 1] q ppu0
2.2.6.TGA analysis
Thermal stability of dried films were determined by the
Thermo gravimetric analyzer (TG/DSC, STA449C, NET-
ZSCH Co. Germany) by heating the sample (24 mg) un-
der a flow of air (40 mL/min) and protective nitrogen (30
mL/min) at 15°C/min from 40 to 650°C. The TGA sam-
ples were prepared by the method described in the film
preparation.
2.3 Synthesis of the NPAD
Acrylic copolymers with varying monomer contents were
synthesized by well-known solution copolymerization tech-
nique in acetone using AIBN as an initiator (14). The co-
monomer contents were adjusted by calculating the T, of
the copolymers from the Fox equation. Polymerizations
were carried out in a four-necked flask equipped with a re-
flux condenser, stirrer and thermometer at 65° C in an inert
atmosphere of nitrogen. 50 g of acetone as a solvent was
taken in the reactor. AIBN as an initiator (1.0 g) was dis-
solved in 75 g of the monomers and the mixture was added
dropwise to the reactor for an initial 3 h followed by a fur-
ther 2 h reaction with a continuous stirring condition. The
reaction was stopped at 98% monomer to polymer conver-
sion. Table 1 reports the composition of the copolymers
synthesized for this study in detail.
were mixed
tralized with dimethylethanolamine, the polyme
uonos
Iable 1.T'he compositions of P1-P3
were dispersednwate and thentheacetone was distilled
added to control the pH of NPAD to 79.
and
synthc
of P1
2.4Preparationof 2K-WPU Coatings
The defoamer and leveling agent were first added to the
NPAD (0.02 wt% based on the NPAD), then the XP2655
was added into the NPAD according to 1.5:1 of the mo-
lar ratio of NCO and OH groups, and stirred for another
10 min before the films were made, water was added to
control the application viscosities. Although in an idea sys-
tem, an equal stoichiometry of polyisocyanate and polyol
is desired, in reality, 2k-WPU systems are usually mixed
with a large molar excess of polyisocyanate to competing
reactions of isocyanate with water according to references
(810). The preparation of CPAD and PAE based 2K-WPU
were same as those of the NPAD-based 2K-WPU coatings
2.5Preparation of 2K-WPUFilm
The coatings were brushed onto clean glass panels and
sand-treated thin tinplate panels kept the thickness of the
dry film at 20 μm ± 3 μm, and then dried at room tem-
perature. The gloss, adhesion, flexibility, and impact resis-
tance of films were measured after the panel was dried for
48 h, and the pencil hardness was measured after 48 h and
7 days, respectively. The water and chemical resistance were
determined after 7 days
3 Results and Discussion
3.1Preparation and Particle Size Distribution of NPAl
Scheme 1 illustrated the synthetic routes of NPAD. The
acrylic copolymers P1, P2 and P3 were synthesized inde-
pendently by free radical solution copolymerization using
the AIBN as an initiator in the acetone, which the COOH
groups are concentrated only on the P1 and P3. Mixed
P1 and P2 were placed in a separate reaction vessel and
then neutralized with a DMEA with the aid of a stirrer,
emulsified it with water and the acetone was removed to
afford NPAD systems with 4045% solid contents. Obvi-
ously, the ratios of MMA to BA have a drastic impact on
the physical mechanical properties of acrylic copolymers
and 2K-WPU. The incorporation of the hard monomer
(MMA) results in the rigidity and good adhesion of the
acrylic copolymers and 2K-WPU. However, the flexibility
of the acrylic copolymers and 2K-WPU is improved while
the strength decreased with the incorporation of the soft
monomer (BA). We also found that the ratios of MMA to
10 aqo0 60 60:7 e [1su 1] q pp0umo
Fig. 1. The particles size distributions of NPAD with vary mass
ratios of P1 and P2. [(a) P1/P2 = 7:3, dp = 224 nm, α = 91%; (b)
P1/P2 = 6:4; dp; = 147 nm, clp = 367 nm, α = 93%; (c) P1/P2
= 4:6, dlp) = 146 nm, alp = 552 nm, α = 86% (d) P1/P2 = 3:7,
dp = 134 nm, αdp = 2000 nm, α = 82%].
Since NPADs were prepared by the combination of dif-
ferent amounts of a salt group contain in P1 and without
salt groups P2, the particle sizes and distributions of NPAD
can be controlled by both the amount of the Pl and the con-
centration of salt groups in the P1. Figure I illustrates the
particle sizes and distributions changed with the mass ra-
tios of P1 and P2 in the range of 3070%/ along with gel
contents of NPAD-based 2K-WPU.
Figure 1 clearly demonstrates that all NPAD have a bi-
modal particle distribution. The small particle average di-
ameters were similar in the range of 130150 nm, while
the larger particle average diameters were changed with
the content of P ranging from 224 nm to 2000 nm. The
gel contents of NPAD-based 2K-WPU were in the range of
8293% which are listed in Figure 2. The NPAD become un-
stable with the content of P1 below 30 wt%, it is attributed
to the fact that the hydrophility of NPAD increased along
with the particle sizes which decreased with an increasing
amount of P1, and increasing the stability of NPAD. The
mass ratio between P1 and P2 has a great influence on
both particle populations With an increasing amount of
P1, the larger particles get smaller. The small particle frac-
tion slightly changes its diameter, but the number of small
particles is growing. Shear energy has no influence on the 
particle size distribution of the dispersions. This means that
these dispersions are thermodynamically stable systems.
We also synthesized the P3 with 5.0 wt% MAA cont
and the other
are the
ie as P2
and ther
ed P3 dis
(CPAD)
Fig. 2. The particle sizes and distributions of CPAD and NPAD
dp : =/d)  V % 0s  pziss
nm); NPAD (P3/P2 =
= 1:1, αpl
= 60 nm; d,2 = 300 nm)]
with 50 wt% of the P3 and 50 wt% of the P2. Figure 2 shows
the particle sizes and distributions of CPAD and NPAD.
The NPAD exhibits larger particle sizes (d, = 160 nm) and
a continued bimodal particle size distributions in contrast
to CPAD (dp = 56 nm). However, the smaller particle av-
erage diameter of NPAD is similar to that of the CPAD. It
could be concluded that the larger particles (d,  300 nm)
formed core-shell structures, and the hydrophilic P3 forms
the shell, and the P2 forms the core during emulsifying
process It was proven by the TEM picture of NPAD (P3
and P2) in Figure 3. The TEM image shows that NPAD
contains the small particles and the larger particles, and the
small particles are stabile and stained, which consisted only
of hydrophilic P3(containing St). While the larger particles
have a clear core-shell structure, which is formed by the P3
(stained domains) and P2 (unstained domains).
In most 2K-WPU systems, the polyols and polyiso-
cyanates are not distributed homogeneously in the film,
and the 2K-WPU film appearances are not as good, which
was testified by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The con-
dition can be improved to by using NPAD with good
self-emulsified ability. Thus, the special morphology of
Fig. 3. TEM picture of the NPAD (P3/P2 = 1:1
  0 6  [ ]  
Fig. 4. The three-dimensional AFM images of 2K-WPU film (a)
NPAD-based (P3/P2 = 1:1); and (b) PAE-based (P3/P2 =0:1).
ability to the polyisocyanate crosslinker than that of the
PAE, probably due to the presence of a large number of
small hydrophilic particles, The AFM topographic images
of NPAD- and PAE-based 2K-WPU film are shown in
Figure 4. Figure 4 demonstrated that the average rough-
ness (Ra) and root mean square roughness (Rq) in the
NPAD-based 2K-WPU film were 1.61 and 2.15 nm, respec-
tively, while the responding value of the PAE-based film was
3.62 and 4.25 nm, respectively in Figure 4(b). It was found
that the NPAD-based 2K-WPU film was uniform, and the
boundaries between the polyols and polyisocyanates were
ambiguous
3.2 IR Analysis
Figure 5 depicts the FTIR spectra of NPAD (A), XP2655
(B) and cured NPAD-based 2K-WPU (C). Trace A shows
that the band at 3450 cm attributes to the OH group
stretching vibration; the band 1734 cm- due to C=0
stretching mode, and the bands at 1243 cmand 1166
cm are attributed to the CO stretching vibrations of
acrylic ester groups; and the —CH bending deformation
mode is detected at 1460 cm. Trace B indicated the band 
2274 cm responsible for NCO group. The bands at 1789
cm′, 1692 cm′ and 1641 cm′ represent asymmetric and
symmetric C=O stretching modes of the HDI trimer, re-
Fig. 5. FTIR spectra of NPAD (P3/P2 = 1:1) (A), XP2655(B)
and cured 2K-WPU(C)
spectively (16). In the trace C, the wide and strong OH
and a new sharp peak appeared at 3353 cm, which was
attributed to NH absorption. The NCO absorption peak
at 2273 cm disappeared, indicating that the NCO group
reacted completely. A new stronger peak at 1689 cm was
attributed to C=O stretch vibration, which meant that a
reaction between water and NCO took place. The absorp-
tion peak at 1563 cm was attributed to NH bond vibra-
tion and CN symmetry stretch vibration, and the sharp
and strong peak at 761 cm-1 was absorption due to CN
bond vibration. These indicated the presence of urethane
bond and urea bond formation. A new peak appeared at
1168 cm1 that was attributed to the CNC stretch vi-
bration in the isocyanurate ring in the hydrophilic-modified
curing agent.
3.3 TGA Analysis
Figure 6 illustrates the TGA curves of the NPAD- and
CPAD-based cured 2K-WPU films which formulated with
an NCO/OH molar ratio of 1.5:1. It shows that the ini-
tial decomposition temperature of NPAD-based 2K-WPU
was about 225°C, slightly higher than that of CPAD-based
(220°C), indicating that the NPAD-based 2K-WPU film
possesses good thermal stability.
3.4The Film Properties of 2K-WPU
NPAD- (P3 and P2), CPAD-(P3), and PAE-based (P1)
2K-WPU were prepared with 1.5:1 of the molar ratio of
NCO and OH groups, and the film properties including
the gross, water- and ethanol-absorption, and gel con-
tent were illustrated in Figure 7. It was clearly demon-
strated that NPAD-based 2K-WPU films displayed the
higher gloss and gel contents, the lower water- and ethanol-
uptake than those of CPAD- and PAE-based. It was prob-
ably attributable to the NPAD with a bimodal particle size
Fig. 6. TGA curves of 2K-WPU films (NPAD: P3/P2 = 1:1
CPAD: P3/P2 = 1:0).
Downloaded by [Trent University] at 22:09 09 October 2014
distribution which possesses a favorable emulsifying ability
and complete miscibility to the crosslinker, which leads to
minimizing the side reaction between NCO groups and wa-
ter and increase the crosslinking degree of film. In addition,
the gel content of NPAD based 2k-WPU film was high,
about 95%, it also provided evidence that HPMA units dis-
persed uniformly in the polymer chains and all hydroxy
groups in polymer chains could crosslink with isocyanate
groups PAE-based 2K-WPU exhibits rapid physical drying
properties at room temperature due to the high molecular
weight of PAE, but PAE-based 2K-WPU film possesses
poor appearance and water/ethanol-resistance due to the
presence of surfactants remaining in the drying fim. The
appearance of the CPAD-based 2K-WPU film was similar
to that of NPAD, while the water-/ethanol resistance of
CPAD-based 2K-WPU film was inferior to those NPAD-
based due to higher carboxy group contents in the CPAD.
Table 2 also demonstrated that the NPAD-based 2K-WPU
film displays good appearance, high hardness, and excellent
water-/ethanol-resistance properties.
Iable 2. The properties of NPAD-, CPAD- and PAE-based 2K-WPU film:
CPAD: con
aventional acrylic poly
ymer dispersi
NPAD: Novel acrylic polymer dispersion P3/P2 = 1:1
‘PAE: acrylic polymer 
on, P1/P2 =1:0
Fig. 7. The properties of NPAD- (P3/P2 = 1:1), CPAD-( P3/P2
= 1:0) and PAE(P1/P2 = 1:0)-based 2K-WPU films
4 Conclusions
Novel self-emulsifying aqueous acrylic polymer dispersions
for two component waterborn polyurethane coatings were
prepared by the emulsification of self-emulsifying polymer
blends in water. The blends typically consist of two poly-
mers, one is a salt group containing P1, and the other P2
is free of salt groups. The DLS analysis data disclosed that
the NPAD have a bimodal particle size distribution, which
can be controlled by the amount of salt group contain-
ing polymer and the concentration of salt groups in this
polymer. TEM images showed that the NPAD contains
small particles from Pl and a core-shell structure larger
particle. AMF pictures showed the films of NPAD-based
2K-WPU display excellent appearance. The NPAD-based
2K-WPU possessed high performance films including 90%
of the gloss, 0.81 of the pendulum hardness, 4.2 wt% of
the water uptake, and 8.5 wt% of the ethanol absorption.
TGA curves showed that NPAD-based 2K-WPU film dis-
play good thermal stability up to 225°C.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully thank the "Program for New Century Ex-
cellent Talents in University" (NCET-08-0204), the “Na-
tional Science Foundation of China” (20976060), and “The
Project Sponsored by the Scientific Research Foundation
for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Educa-
tion Ministry (China)" for financial support of this work.
References
10 qo0 60 60:  [s 1] q pp0
