Bio-BasedWaterbornePolyurethaneCoatingswithHigh
andAnticorrosive
Properties
Zhiming Ha, Lei Lei,* Mengyu Zhou, Yuzheng Xia, Xiaonong Chen, Peng Mao, Bifa Fan,
and ShuxianShi*
Cite This: AC5 Appl. Mater. Interfoces 2023, 15, 74277441
sdu
the utmost relevance to the development of transparent
(WPU) coating with antismudge property, it is challenging to
antismudge coatings. To prepare a waterborne polyurethane
coating.Herein, we pare a transparent bi-based WPU coaing
balance the stability of dispersion and the antismudge property of
grafted with a minor proportion of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (WPU.
g-PDMS) using renewable castor oil, monocarbinol-terminated
PDMS, hexamethylene disocyanate trimer, and 2,2-bis-
(hydroxymethyl)propionic acid as raw materials. Efects of the
dosage of monocarbinol-terminated PDMS, the curing temper-
ature, and the curing time on the antismudge performance were
 (da oooe) s su  ps sns pss
necessary to obtain a stable WPU-g-PDMS dispersion with a storag
°C) and a period of curing time (>1 h) are indispensable to obtain
necessary to obtain a stable WPU-g-PDMS dispersion with a storage time longer than 6 months. A high curing temperature (>160
C) and a period of curing time >1 h) are indispensable to obtain the excellent antismudge property because they would faclitate
the grafted low-surface-tension PDMS chains to migrate from the interior to the coating surface. The facts that simulated
contaminated liquids such as water, HCl solution, NaOH solution, articial blood, and tissue fluid could slide off easily and cleanly,
and marker ink lined on the coating surface could shrink, indicated that the WPU-g-PDMS coating has good antismudge properties,
[opod qeuogsunymu Aq pasnes aa8ap Buu-ssous uq au o an( uoenouaap rage Aoqs papesuaduoo-gps aq pmos upum
and isocyanate, the WPU-g-PDMS coating has high hardness and good anticorrosive performance. The antismudge functionalization
and waterborme technology of bio-based polyurethane coatings proposed in this work could be a promising contribution to the green
and sustainable development of functional coatings. This kind of WPU-g-PDMS coating is expected to protect and decorate
WORDS:casto
1. INTRODUCTION
widely used as a protection and decoration layer on various
substrates, such as electronic screens, vehicles, ships, and
transparency to visualize the shape and texture of substrate
materials, high hardnes to protect the substrate from external
physical damage (e.g, wear resistance), and resistance to
corrosion from unexpected chemicals and harsh environments.
Especially in some environments with high wear and corrosion, 
the application value of the coating is more obvious. For
instance, a protective coating applied on the endoscope could
protect its critical lens from corrosion through direct contact
with bodily fluids, such as gastric juice, blood, and tissue fluid
the coating will be polluted, resulting in the lens of the
endoscope being unable to clearly show the condition in the
body, which is not conducive to doctors’ diagnosis.
It is very necessary to coat the
corrosion resistance, high transparency, and high hardness but
endo
with
also good antismudge performance, which can make the
endoscope have an excellent display effect even under the
Aus&ums 1age ueap o Asea aq pue quauruoaua panpod s,Apoq
antismudge surfaces. The first technique, knc
own as the *lotus
influence the
coating's roughness
The
involves introducing low-surface-tension
materials to the
coating. This could be realized by either constructing a
aseans snosod pasnyun-pnbq Auaddips pandsu-saqudau
ofits losuface-tension lubricant during long-term usage and
coating surface.
of lubricant, but the monolayer’s functional dewetting surface
of a low-surface-energy layer could temporarily prevent the loss
is not durable and is easily damaged by extermal force or wear
and poor antismudge durability have been effectively resolved
by the strategy demonstrated by Liu to introduc
GLIDE) of functional antismudge coatings.
method, the low-surface-tension component is grafted
Inthis
throughout the coating, To minimize the coating’s s
surface
the coating could migrate to the cozting surface and create a
energy, the low-surface-tension component on the top layer of
polymer brush layer that enables antismudge capabilities.
The low-surface-tension component inside the coating forms
microphase separation and generates localized nanodomains
that act as nanopoolsof a ewetting agent. In addition, th
coating's transparency will not be impacted because these
nanometer-sized domains are smaller than the visible light
coating is damaged, the antismudge component supply from
used to functionalize epoxy and polyurethane (PU) coatings
Since 2015,
widely
due to their excellent wear resistance, flexibility, and trans-
parency.
Another advantage of the NP-GLIDE technol-
ogy is that it can replace the fluorinated component with eco-
friendly poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) with low surface
 u rg o e Sum a se r
concept of environmental sustainability, it is very important to
use renewable bio-based resources instead of compos
synthesized from petroleum-based fossil resources for the
nents
preparation of NP-GLIDE polyurethane coatings.
based polyurethanes have been successfully prepared from
The bio-
starch,~
β-cyclodextrin,* cottonseed oil,*
soybean oil,*
manufacturing of a transparent NP-GLIDE PU coating by
acetylated starch. Howerer, the biomass polyol starch needs
to be chemically modified to increase its compatibility with
other coating ingredients, and the synthesis process as well as
the final PU-PDMS products contain organic solvents Zhou
used castor oil as bio-polyol for the synthesis of NP-GLIDE
PU coating with excellent antismudge properties and an
multiple hydroxyl groups that could be used as polyol for
polyurethane synthesis without modification.° Due to the
average hydroxyl functionality of castor oil up to 2.7, the
degree of cross-linking and the hardness of the PU coating
could be improved by using the castor oil as bio-polyol.3
synthesis is more enviror
at-triendly,
rent woriks on NP-
the
human beings.
a promising way to solve the VOCs
Nowadays, waterborme polyurethane (WPU) coating has been
emission issu
extensively researched for a long time and applied widely in
many felds. However, in the waterborme system, masive polar
hydrophilic groups existed, and hydrophobic PDMS chains are
usually trapped inside the latex particles, which restrict the
hydrophobic PDMS polymer chains to 1
migrate from
coating's interior to its surface to provide
the
a8pnusgue
performance. Besides, the polar groups on the coating surface
are easy to adhere to various types of pollutants. This
hinders the development of NP-GLIDE WPU coating
greatly
antismudge properties of NP-GLIDE WPU coating, One is to
At present,
shield the polar hydrophilic groups by a lot of PDMS for
dN u pauodau Surn uadod apnusque aq uodu
GLIDE WPU coating by adding 4.812.0 wt % PDMS, much
higher than that in conventional NP-GLIDE coatings of 0.5
5.0 wt %.4° The stability of WPU dispersion, however, might
be greatly decreased by using excess PDMS, during both the
procedures of dispersion preparation and dispersion storage.
To stabilize the dispersion, hydrophilic groups (COOH)
need to be typically introduced; however, this would go against
the antismudge property of coating.
940 The balance between
the stability of dispersion and the antismudge property of
the cros-linking degree of the PU prepolymer for improving
coating is difficult to control. Another technique is to reduce
the stability of WPU dispersion. However, the antismudge
property of coatings was unsatisfactory due to the low cross-
 sdnou& seod oqdopq assu pue aaap Suu
improve the antismudge property of coatings, a second
component with a few functional reactive groups, such as
hexamethoxymethylmelamine (HMMM) and hexamethylene
disocyanate trimer (HDIT), should be added additionally in
the dispersion, prior t the coating forming stage, to ensure the
hydrophilic polar groups are consumed during the coating
curing_process.
Although this method could obtain NP.
PDMS content (1.05.0 wt %), the coating preparation
GLIDE WPU coatings with antismudge property at a low
process is complicated by adding the second reactive
component to compensate for the lack of cros-linking degree
to improve the water-resistance properties.
WPU
functionality of 2.7) and hexamethylene disocyanate trimer
(functionality of 3.0) as raw materials and 2,2-bis-
(hydroxymethyl)propionic acid (DMPA) as a hydrophilic
chain extender. The problem of the balance between the
property of the matching coating could be solved by
stability of WPU-g-PDMS dispersion and the antismudge
controlling the stirring speed during the dispersion process
and the curing temperature and time during the flm-forming
process. Rigorous stirring is necesary to obtain a stable WPU.
period of curing time, which would facilitate the grafted low.
g-PDMS dispersion. In addition, high curing temperature and a
surface-tension PDMS chain migration to overcome the
adsd apnusue quaaxa m Sueo NdM 
influence of polar groups, are indispensable to obtain a NP.
Furthermore, the hardness and anticorrosive performance of
WPU-g-PDMS coatings could be improved by the high cross
linking degree caused by the reaction of castor oil and HIDT.
ethane coating with antismudge property could make a
promising contribution to the green and sustainable develop-
ment of functional coatings. And this kind of WPU-g-PDMS
coating is expected to protect and decorate electronic screns,
vehicles, and buildings, especially endoscopes.
2.EXPERIMENTALSECTION
2.1. Materials. Hexamethylene disocyanate trimer (HDIT) was
supplied by Wanhua Chemical Group Co, Lad (Shandong, China).
Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Monocarbinol-terminated poly-
Castor oil (95%) was obtained fom Meryer Chemical Technology
(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS-OH, M, = 5.0 kDa) was purchased
ppau (1enrog uoqsr) ssue soy uog noq stm (%66
from
Gelest Inc. 2,2-Bis(bydroxymethyl)propionic acid (DMPA,
amine (TEA, 99%) was acquired from Fuchen Chemical Reagent Co.,
Ltd. (Tianjin, China). Butanone was purchased from Beijing
Tongguang Fine Chemical Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). Di-n-butyf.
amine (95%) was supplied by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.
aam (%66) 1oqooe doados pue (%66) auax (euu “eufueqs)
and HCI were suple by Beljing Chemial Worls Co,Lad (Bejing
obtained from Madkin Reagent Co, Ltd. (Shanghai, China). NaCl
China). Synthetic blood (simulated fuid) was supplied by Guangjian
Testing Technology Co, Ltd. (Guangdong, China).
 of WPU
PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and S), were prpred in this study. The va
grafted with PDMS polymer chain dispersions,
of *x" represents the mas percentage of PDMS. Specifically, the
SNCd Jo % m 0z Burueuoo SWGd-8-ndM po saooud spauAs
was described as follows. First, HDIT (6.00 g, 10.74 mmol) and
PDMS-OH (0.28 g, 0.06 mmol) predissolved in 5.00 mL of butanone
were added to a 100 mL three-neck flask with mechanical stiring
(100 rpm) to react with each other at 68 °C. Afer 1 h, castor oil (5.61
g, 6.01 mmol) and DMPA (1.30 g 9.69 mmol) were added to the
reaction flask. Ten minutes later, S0 mL of butanone was added to
decrease the viscosity of the solution. After a 3 h reaction, TEA (1.08
g, 10.67 mmol) with a 1.1 time molar dosage of DMPA was added
after the system temperature decreased to 30 °C. The WPU-g-PDMS
prepolymer was dispersed in water with rigorous stirring at 3000 rpm
paddles, with a maximum length of 5.0 mm and a maximum wridth of
Bus podeqs-uaosas ou qm ppou soefe ue q  1 1og
9.5 mm. Finally, the residual oeganic solvent (butanone) and part of
Japum 。 0g re uogeaodra Aueau yfnonp paaotuaa auam 1aem
vacuum to obtain the WPU-g-PDMS, dispersion with a solid content 
of around 35.0%.
2.3. Preparation of WPU-g-PDMS Coating. WPU-g-PDMS, (x
= 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) dispersions were coated on glass slides to form
coatings to examine the transparency, hardness, and antismudge
am (u S × uu t) sps se8 feogads ssae
pretreated by soaking in 10.0% sodium hydroxide solution for 12 h,
rinsed with water, and dried in an oven at 80 °C. Specificall, the
roll-coated on the glass slide. Then, WPU-g-PDMS, coating was cured
WPU-g-PDMS, dispersion (0.74 mL, 350 mg/mL) was uniformly
at 160 °C for 3 h. Similarly, the same procedure was used to prepare
WPU-g-PDMS, coatings coated on ^different substrates, such as
tinplate, ceramics, plastic, and wood.
Dispersion. The particle size and distribution of WPU-g-PDMS, (x =
2.4. Characterization. 2.4.1. Particle Size and Stability of WPU
1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) dispersions were determined by the zeta potential
and particle size analyzer (90Plus Zeta, Brookhaven Instruments Co.,
Germany). The diluted dispersion at 1:20 (v/v) was flled into a
g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) dispersions was judged according to
standard cuvette after ultrasonication for 1 min. The stability of WPU.
the phenomena of whether there was delamination and precipitation
occurred after 60 days of storage at room temperature.
of WPU and WPU-g-PDMS, dispersions
2.4.2. Tronsmission Electron Micros
mission electron microscope (JEM-2100F, JEOL
ohseredby
trans
kV. The diluted dispersion
Tlesl
supported by carbon flm. The sample was fully dried before
characterization.
2.4.3. Fourier Troansform Infrared Specroscopy (FTIR). Atteu
ated total reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR.
FTIR) was utilized to mo
onitor the molecular structure of the WPU-g-
PDMS coatings Specifically, the coatings with a thickness of around
70 μm were cut to a sample size of 20.0 mm × 20.0 mm. The Fourier
infrared spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Fisher) was utilied to
scan at a resolution of 4000400 cm~2 with a resolution of 4 cm~
The location and strength of the distinctive abseption peaks were
coatings
2.4.4. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). X-ray photo-
electron spectroscopy (K-α, Thermo
Scientific)was utilized  to
examine the elemental compositions of the WPU-g-PDMS coatings.
× 10.0 mm. The elements of C, N, O, and Si were analyzed
Coatings with a thickness of around 70 μm were trimmed to 10.0 mm
) sI uoqes go enpads uoμnosaa-saufq Bumboe 4q fjagegurnb
pue (sz IS) sz uoxgs (sI O) s[ ua&&xo *(s1 N) sI ua8onqu (s1
silicon 2p (Si 2p).
WPU-g-PDMS Coatings. The thickness of WPU.g-PDMS coatings
2.4.5. Thickness,Tra
was measured by the coating thickness gauge (Shenzhen Yowesa
induction principle and calculated from the average valuc of five
Sensor System Co., Ltd., China) through the electromagnetic
could be tested according to the principle of the instrument
randomly selected test points. Only the coating coated on the tinplate
measurement. If the same amount of dispersion is coated on the
glass slides or other substrates with the same area, the thicknes of
PDMS coatings was evaluated using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer
coatings may be considered identical. The transparency of WPU-g
(UV-6100S, Shanghai Metash Instruments Co, Ltd., China) at a
 jo s [d  wu 00 yo m
coatings was tested accoeding to the ASTM D3363 protocol. The
se) ueoo (Sd) uaafsijod jo soneA (H) ssoupueq uopeupoueu
the control), WPU coating and WPU-g-PDMS coating with a
thickness of 70 μm coated on glass slides were measured by the
nanoindentation instrument (NHT2, CSM Instruments, Switzerland).
The maximum load was set at 500 mN, while the rates of loading and
for 15 s after the maximum load was reached. The nanoindentation
unloading extemal forces were controlled at 17 mN/s and maintained
hardness values were calculated by the OliverPharr method. The
water absorption of WPU.g-PDMS coatings was measured via the
weight method described in the ASTM D570 standard. Using a
tinplate-based flm elasticity tester (QTX, Tianjin Kexin Electronic
was followed to test the flexibility of WPU.g-PDMS coatings.
Control Engineering Company, China), the ASTM D522 protocol
WPU-g-PDMS coatings
2.4.6. Surface Weftabiry. The contact angle (CA) and sliding
angle (SA) of WPU-g-PDMS coatings were measured on an optical
contact angle meter (OCA20, Dataphysics, Germany) to indicate
liquid droplet was injested onto the coating surface through asyringe.
their surface wettability. To test the contact angle, S.0 μL of a test
The arerage contact angle was calculated after testing five distinct
uo pmbr sa po f or$1 Buμmod 6g aoens paproo oq uo suogeso]
the coating surface, the sliding angle was evaluated. The sliding angle
was found by videotaping while the test platform was tilted from 0 to
90°. The droplet’s angle of departure from the coating surface was
known as the sliding angle.
2.4.7. Ink Resistonce. Before testing the ink resistance of coatings,
the cured coatings should be stored at room temperature for at least 8
h. Oily and water-based marker pens were used to draw traces on the
the ink on the coating surface stopped shrinlking, The area of the ink
coating surface at a speed of 4 cm/s. The photograph was taken after
trace left on the coating surface after ink shrinkage was analyzed by
Image] software. The ink residue on the coating surface was removed
using a soft wipe.
2.4.8. Anticorrosion. The anticorrosion was characterized by
L
wt % NaCl aqueous solution. The uncoated tinplate was used as the
control The condition of corrosion was periodically monitored. The
corrosion resistance of the coatings was evaluated by macroscopic
phenomena, such as rasting and discoloration of the sample.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this
graftec
step
polyolasisyaatndMAsyhl hin
prepolyn
with hydrophilic
usingc
extender. In particular, PDMS-OH, an eco-friendly dewetting
agent, should be reacted first with HDIT. The second step is to
with TEA ating as a neutralizing agent. The thid step is t
emulsify the PU prepolymer for preparing WPU dispersion,
coat the WPU dispersion on glass slides or other substrates for
obtaining the NP-GLIDE WPU coating.
procedures are displayed in Sche
Figure 2. (a) Optical photos of WPU and WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings on the glass slides. (b) Optical photos of WPU-g-PDMS
PDMS Dispersion. WPU-g-PDMS disper
by the classic water-based polyurethane process To obtain a
stable dispersion, a few important factors should be considered.
To ensure that all PDMS-OH connected with HDIT, PDMS-
OH was first prereacted with excess HDIT. A particular
amount of butanone, which would be
:removedby rotary
evaporation after emulsification, was added to the system to
adjust the viscosity during the subsequent process. Before TEA
sdnoi8 6xoe3a zgeu 0%#12pumdx
was added, the residual content of NCO groups needed to be
(COOH) from DMPA, which could increase the hydro
philicity and the stability of the system. To successfully
emulsify polyurethane, rigorous stirring at a high speed of up to
3000 rpm is required. A series of WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3,
4, and 5) dispersions were prepared in this study (Figure 1),
where “x” denotes the weight percentage (wt %) of PMDS.
Figure la illustrates that ater 6 months of storage at room
temperature, the control of WPU dispersion without PDMS
and WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) dispersions with
different contents of PDMS are all stable and no evidence of
delamination and precipitation could be seen. As the PDMS
content was increased, the color of the WPU-g-PDMS,
dispersions gradually changed from translucent blue to millky
white. A particle size analyzer was used to determine the latex
particle size of the WPU-g-PDMS, dispersions.
From Figure 1b, it could 
ugh the particle
size of WPU-g-PDMS, was different, the particle size
distribution was nearly equal, suggesting that the WPU-g
chains might be distributed in water uniformly to produce a
PDMS, grafted with different amounts of hydrophobic PDMS
stable dispersion. Compared to the WPU disperion with an
average particle size of 33.0 nm, the particle size of WPU-g
PDMS, dispersions increased from 61.9 nm to 78.6, 94.2,
119.5, and 121.6 nm, as the PDMS content increased from 1.0
wt % to 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 wt %, respectively.
Generally, the hydrophobic PDMS chains
WPU-g-PDMS,
of PDMS increased, which caused an increase in free volume
Dunt
and, ultimately, a bigger particle size. Furthermore, the latex
color andparticle size a
dispersion typically has latex particles between 40 and 100
nm in size, while milky white dispersion has latex particles
dispersions listed in Figure Ia clearly showed color changes in
 WPU-g-PDMS
latex particles of WPU and WPU-g-PDMS, had a uniform size
ined by TEM. As shc
distribution. The particle size for WPU ranged from 30 nm to
80
am,
3.2. Preparation andProperties of WPU-g-PDMS
g-PDMS Cooting. The WPU-g-PDMS, dispersions could be
used to produce NP-GLIDE WPU coatings.
3-dA snorea jo sopoqd qeogdo sqsdap ez amb!g uorsiadsp
PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings on glass slides. It was
found that each coating was highly transparent and had a
smooth surface. Figure S1 shows the SEM-characterized
morphology of WPU and WPU-g-PDMS, coatings with
smooth surfaces without cracks or shrinkage. Similarly,
WPU-g-PDMS, dispersion could be coated on a variety of
substrates, including wood, ceramics, plastic, and tinplate,
which are shown in Figure 2b. All of these coatings
excellent coating surfaces and transparency. The only differ-
have
ence is that there was an orange-peel effect if the wood was
used as a substrate. The easy adsorption of water by wood
leads to an increase in the solid content of the dispersion,
which may prevent the polymer chains from flowing freely and
the lack of the distinctive absorption peak of the isocyanate
emulsification. The stretching vibration absorption peaks of
and
NH at 3321 cm* and C=O at 1683 cm~ also show that
the polyurethane was made by HDIT and castor oil by
generating the carbamate structure (NHCOO). Although
PDMS-OH was introduced to react with HDIT through a
chemical grafting process, the typical rocking vibration
as shown in Figure 3a. The reference claims that when
the
Figure 3. (a) ATR-FTIR spectra. (b) XPS characterization of WPU
and WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings. The embedded
tables represent the element content of O, N, C, and Si existing on the
coating surface.
PDMS content increases, the rocking vibration absorption
peak of SiCH, from PDMS would gradually shift to the low
wavenumber (blue shift).*° From Figure 3a, it was determined
that the peak at S06 cm1, which was present in WPU-g-
PDMS, coating but lacking in WPU coating, belonged to Si
CH, The higher the content of PDMS in WPU-g-PDMS
SiCH, at 806 cm.
coatings, the stronger the rocking vibration absorption peak of
Theoretically, the Si content of WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3
andS
is0.4%
0.8%
1.1%
1.9%
Figure 4. (a) Nanoindentation load-c
respectively. Generally, the grafted hydrophobic PDMS
polymer chains with low surface energy in NP-GLIDE coating
would migrate from the coating's interior to its surface and
enrich to enable the WPU-g-PDMS, coating with antismudge
properties. To verify whether the obtained WPU-g-PDMS
coating is NP-GLIDE r not, X-ray photoelectron spectroso-
Py was utlized to emine the lemntal mpostions ofWPU
and WPU.gPDMS, ctings. The typical peaks of O 1s, N 1s,
u! paquasaud are ssugeos ug Bugsra dz IS pue 'st !S 'sI 
Figure 3b. It was noticed that the higher the content of PDMS
in WPU-g-PDMS, coatings, the stronger the peaks of Si 2s and
Si 2p displayed. From the tables containing the element
content of O, N, C, and Si embedded in Figure 3b, it could
also be found that as the PDMS content in WPU-g-PDMS,
coatings increased, the proportions of Si and O elements in the
coating surface increased, while N and C elements decreased.
For example, the surface Si content of WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1,
2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings detected by XPS is 9.1%, 11.1%, 14.0%,
15.5%, and 17.0%, respectively, which is much higher than the
theoretical Si content calculated above. This result is consistent
with other comparable NP-GLIDE coatings* because PDMS
segments migrate from the interior to the coating surface at a
certain temperature and eventually enriched to lower the
coating surface energy.However, even though noPDMS was
introduced in the WPU coating, the element of Si was still
detected, and the Si content reached up to 4.7%, which is
attributable to the Si conductive adhesive used to attach the
the Si content ofWPU, the surface Si content of WPUg
coating to the test bench before XPS testing.33 After deducting
PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings is 4.4%, 6.4%, 9.3%,
10.8%, and 12.3%, respectively, still much higher than the
PDMS Coating. The physical peoperties of the WPU-g-PDMS,
[uad *Kouaredsuen se qpns sBuyeoo (S pue ° ′ ‘z ‘I = x)
hardness, adhesion, and water absorption, were evaluated using
various techniques and are presented in Table S1. It could be
found that all of the WPU-g-PDMS, coatings exhibit excellent
transparency, with a transmittance higher than 95.0% at 500
nm. This is due to the microphase-separated PDMS domain
size being smaller than the visible light wavelength, which
prevents light scattering.*
8The transmittance of WPU-g
PDMS coatings at wavelengths from 400 to 700 nm is shown
in Figure S2. It could be found that the transmittance of
coatings increased as the wavelength increased, with the lowest
transmittance exceeding 92.0% at 400 nm and the highest
transmittance above 98.0% at 700 nm. Besides, as the PDMS
decreased.
decreased.
The pencil hardness of 6H for WPU and WPU-g-PDMS,
coatings is significantly higher than that of 3H for the
conventional PU coatings due to the high crosslinking of
coatings caused by reacting between the HDIT with a
functionlity of 3.0 and the castor oil with an average
functionality of 2.7.35s0 To characterize the hardness more
accurately,the nanoindentation hardness of WPU and WPU-g-
PDMS, coatings coated on the glass slides was characterized,
and the curve of nanoindentation load-displacement and the
corresponding nanoindentation hardnes values (H) calculated
a q paedad ugeos (Sd) auaz(siod a1 6pagadsa
by the OliverPharr method are shown in Figure 4a,b,
same method was used as the control to compare with the
WPU and WPU-g-PDMS coatings It could be found from
Figure 4 that the hardness of the WPU and WPU-g-PDMS2
coatings was much higher than that of the control, 2.5 and 2.2
times of PS coating, respectively. As shown in Figure 4a, the
depths of traces leff on the WPU coating and WPU-g-PDMS
coating were 6.1 and 6.7 μm, respectively, while 8.8 μm for the
better hardness of coatings. It can be seen from Figure 4b that
control of PS coating, Generally, the lower depth of traces, the
the nanoindentation hardness value of PS in this study is 259
MPa, very close to 250 MPa that was measured in the
literature. In addition, the hardness values of WPU coating
(657 MPa) and WPU-g-PDMS, coating (567 MPa) are higher
than 460 MPa (corresponding pencil hardness of 4H) but
lower than 1400 MPa (corresponding pencil hardness of 9H)
measured in the literature. Therefore, it could be inferred
that the nanoindentation hardness of WPU and WPU-g-
PDMS coatings matches the penil hardess of 6HHoweer,
the introduction of PDMS would decrease the nano-
indentation hardness to a certain extent due to the lower
cross-linking degree of the coating? and the higher phase
separation degree of the WPUgPDMS coating than the
WPU coating.
2.53 The result indicates that the waterborne
could resist extemal damage.
NP-GLIDE coating of WPU-g-PDMS has high hardness, which
discermible difference of coatings with or without PDMS, or
with different contents of PDMS, on the basic coating
fexibility, an A1 foe adhesion, and a 6H for pencil hardness.
coatings whose thickness was around 70 μm scored an F7 for
Renewable castor oil, which was introduced in large quantities
as soft segment polyol, provides WPU-g-PDMS, coatings with
chain extenders,the coting polarity increases, improving the
remarkable flexibility.* With the addition of polar DMPA
film’s ability to adhere to a variety of surfaces.$* In addition,
the latex particles of WPU-g-PDMS, around 100 nm could
increasing the contact surface area and thus enhancing
occupy the substrate’s microscopic concave-convex surface,
 a a o gq  ue u se
resistance of coatings. In this work, all of the obtained WPU-g-
PDMS, coatings have low water absorption (<0.7%) due to the
3.3. Surface Wettability of WPU-g-PDMS Coating. The
3.3. Surface Wettability of WPU-g-PDMS Coating. The
surface wettability of WPU and WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4,
suogezuapeseup (VSA) a@ue Busps raem pue (VOM) aflue
As seen in Figure 5, the water contact angle for the WPU
Figure 5. Water contact angle and water sliding angle of WPU and
coating is 80.4°, and it increased to 101.5° for WPU-g-PDMS;
PDMS,coating, 103.2° for WPU-g-PDMS coating, and 103.2
coating, 103.1° for WPU-g-PDMS, coating, 103.1° for WPU-g-
for WPU-g-PDMS, The WPU coating was hydrophilic with a
high afinity for water due to the abundance of polar
hydrophilic groups (COOH from DMPA). In WPU-g
PDMS, coatings, the low-surface-tension PDMS segments
moved to the coating surface to cover the hydrophilic
COOH groups and dramatically enhance the hydrophobic
property of WPU-g-PDMS, coatings. It was notied that the
water contact angles for the WPU-g-PDMS, coatings did not
2.0 wt %. The enrichment of PDMS chains on the coating
increase significantly when the PDMS content was higher than
surface may have reached equilibrium as a result. In addition,
the water sliding angle of WPU coating could not be measured
since the —COOH groups make the coating surface hydro-
philic.9 The water droplet was able to slide off the WPU-g
PDMS was introduced to the coatings (higher than 2.0 wt %),
PDMS, coating surface at an angle of 3.8°. However, as more
the water sliding angle rapidly decreased and remained stable.
As shown in Figure 5, the water sliding angle for WPU-g-
PDMS, coating reached 28.7°. The reason here is the same as
that in the water contact angle test. In the sliding angle test of
WPU coating, water adhered to the hydrophilic surface of the
coating. With the introduction of PDMS, the coating surface
changed from hydrophilic to hydrophobic. Therefore, water
droplets can slip offthe surface of WPU-g-PDMS, coating. And
sliding angle is almost unchanged.
when the coating surface is fully covered by PDMS, the water
of the WPU
g-PDMS, c
angle
Table 1. Wettability Characterization of WPU-g-PDMS
Coating for Different Test Liquids
'Miscibility refers
and PDMS
by (b)
er or
percentage of the
was found that the contact angle reduced as the test liquids
surface tension decreased if the test liquids have similar
miscibility, which fits into Young’s equation,
29 When the test
the WPU-g-PDMS, coating surface enriched with a lot of low-
liquids are immiscible or have poor compatibility with PDMS)
surface-energy PDMS chains allowed the liquids to slide down
naturally at a specific sliding angle. However, the test liquid
incompatible with PDMS, hexadecane, and dodecane could
easily slide off the coating surface at a very low angle (<2.0°)
due to the fact that the liquid compatible with PDMS may
increase the mobility of the grafted PDMS chains on the
coating surface, which could dramatically facilitate the mobility
of test liquid correspondingly.
3.4.1. Marker Ink Resist
object's surface to ensure the mark remains clear. However, the
ink would shrink if the coating surface has
properties Then, it is god and convenient to evaluate the
antismudge
antismudge property of coating by whether the ink can write
and shrink, how well the ink shrinks, and whether the ink trace
can be wiped on the coating surface. In this study, both ol-
and water-based markers were used to write on the WPU-g-
PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings. The degree of ink
shrinkage was analyzed via ImageJ software by calculating the
percentage of the ink residual area after ink shrinkage. In
addition, whether the ink trace could be cleaned or not by a
dust-free soft wipe is used to evaluate how smudge-resistant
(oily marker, water-based marker) u
of uncoated glass and the control of WPU
coating, thick and
up to nearly 100%, Furthermore, the ink traces can hardly be
removed by wiping, indicating that none of them possess
antismudge properties. On the contrary, it was evident that the
ink shrank greatly on the WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5)
coating surfaces and the percentage of the ink residual area fell
to a low level, for example, only 5.4% for WPU-g-PDMS, by
water-based marker and 18.1% for WPU-g-PDMS, by an oily
marker. This result nicely demonstrated that the WPU-g-
PDMS, coatings have excellent antismudge performance.
Although the content of PDMS varies in the WPU-g-PDMS,
layer of low-surface-energy PDMS on the surface, making the
(x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings, all of them have a simila thin
percentage of the ink residual area without a big difference,
marker in Figure 6b and for the water-based marker in Figure
How
6c are very different. Unlike the water-based ink trace on
WPU-g-PDMS, coatings, which could be completely removed,
the oily ink trace on those coatings could hardly be cleaned,
of the ink residual area in Figure
 indicate that the antismudge
6b was higher than that in
Figure 6c. Relevant literatures
performance of waterborne coatings is mainly affected by two
factors: the polar groups and the cross-linking degree of
coatings. The existence of polar groups will increase the
coating’s affinity to the polar ink molecules. Previously, our
research group reported a solvent-based polyurethane
antismudge coating prepared from similar raw materials
(castor oil, HDIT) with excellent antismudge performance
against various liquid contaminants, including the oil-based
marker ink.3 Diferent from the solvent-based system,
the
polar groups of COOH were necessarily introduced by
Figure 7. Effects of (a)
polar groups of COOH with the polar contaminates from the
oily marker, the oil-based inks were harder to remove from the
waterborne coating surface than from the solvent-based
coating surface.°o For the efect of cross-linking degree of
coatings, it has been reported that increasing the cross-linking
degree can resist ink penetration. In this study, multifunc-
2.7) and isocyanate (e.g, HDIT with functionalities of 3.0)
tional polyol (e.g, castor oil with an average functionality of
linking degree. However, the greater cross-linking degree might
were used to ensure coatings with a suffcient high cross-
also prevent PDMS from migrating to the coating surface.
Especially in the waterborne system, hydrophobic PDMS
chains are usually trapped inside the latex particles, which
hardly migrate to the coating surface due to the block of the
polar groups. Hence, if the cross-linking degree of waterborne
PU coating is too high, the trapped PDMS chains hardly
 s  d pqs 
migrate to the coating surface, which is more diffcult than that
in the water-based marker ink has high surface tension and
poor compatibity with the PDMS enriched on the coating
surface, which made it more probable for ink contraction. This
proved that the WPU-g-PDMS, coatings could repel the water-
based ink from penetrating the coating’s interior successfully.
Property of WPU-g-PDMS Coating. During the marker ink
3.4.2.Enect or cuning
resistance test, it was noticed that the WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1,
2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings cured at 160 °C for 3 h have excellent
lacked any antismudge properties, which are show in Figure
antismudge properties; however, those cured at 100 °C for 1 h
S3. This is due to the fact that without enough PDMS could
migrate to the coating surface to prevent polar groups from
attaching to contaminants. Obviously, the migration of the
PDMS segment and the overal coating surface energy are
strongly influenced by the curing temperature and the curing
time. Therefore, the effects of curing temperature, curing time,
and storage time at room temperature after curing on the
antismudge performance of the WPU-g-PDMS, coating were
investigated in detail. The detailed results are illustrated in
Figure 7.
example, the percentage of the ink residual area of the WPU-g-
PDMS, coating cured at 100 °C for 1 h reached up to 99.6%;
however, if the curing temperature increased to 180 °C for 1 h,
same curing time, the higher the curing temperature, the lower
it dropped significantly to 19.2%. Obviously, controlling for the
the percentage of the ink residue area, and the better the
antismudge property. This is because the migration of PDMS
polymer chains has been greatly enhanced by the elevated
temperature, which leads to PDMS enrichment on the coating
ink shrinkage. The percentage of the ink n
curing temperature was controlled at 120, 140, or 160 °C and
migration of PDMS segments to the coated surface was a
u Suumo s po uosupa aeadodde ue rsaod sau
beneficial for achieving the optimum
surface
with
enriching
PDMS chains and antismudge performance. However, if the
curing temperature was controlled at 100
08110
°C,
the
percentage of the ink residue area is almost constant. The only
difference for samples cured at 100 or 180 °C is the percentage
of the ink residue area at 100 °C remained at a high value
(>97.6%) even with a curing time delay of 6 h, but for thos
cured at 180 °C, it decreased at a low value (<19.3%) even
performance,
condition
WPU-g-PDMS, coating is
We also found during the marker
freshly cured WPU-g-PDMS, coating (160 °C, 3 h) does not
ink resistance test that:
have excellent antismudge performance, with the percentage of
freshly cured coating was exposed to room temperature for
the ink residual area only being 44.9%. However, after the
about 8 h, the WPU-g-PDMS, coating showed excellent
antismudge properties, and the area was reduced to 18.1%
(Figure 6b). Obviously, the freshly cured coating needs to be
aged at room temperature for some time to achieve the best
antismudge performance. As shown in Figure 7b, the effect of
the storage time at room temperature on the antismudge
property of WPU-g-PDMS, coating after curing at 160 °C for 3
h was investigated. It is easily found that the shrinkage degree
of the ink trace grew significantly, and the morphology of the
ink trace changed from a linear strip to a liquid drop, indicating
an enhancement in the coating’s antismudge property. In
addition, the percentage of the ink residual area is calculated by
Figure 8. Screenshot of simulated liquids (water, HCI solution, NaOH solution, artifcial blood, artificial tissue fluid, collagen peptide, and gelatin)
falling off (a) the uncoated glass substrate, (b) WPU coating, and (c) WPU-.g-PDMS, coating surface. The corresponding time of the sliding
process was inserted. Water, HCl solution, NaOH solution, artificial tissue fluid, collagen peptide, and gelatin were stained with a cresol red
indcatoe.
a xu 1axeu fo oa o a8epuasuad ouL (q) Auodond a8pnsgue o jo ys uogesuds-gas ou yo sureulp seuaps (e) 6 amli
shrinkage on the WPU-g-PDMS, coating surface after soaking in HCI solution (pH = 1), NaOH solution (pH = 13), and water (pH = 7) for 112
h. (c) The percentage of the oily marker ink trace shrinkage on the WPU-g-PDMS, coating surface after soaking in different pH solutions (pH =
erature for 3 h, or heated at 160 °C for 3 h.
Image] software, and the results revealed that it decreased
dramatically during the first 8 h and then tended to a stable
level of roughly 17.0%. The main factor was that the
3.4.3. Contaminated Liquid Repelling Test.The anti
smudge coating surtace has the ability to repel a variety of
surface and keep the coating clean.
Asinthecaseotmedica
endoscopes that are frequently contaminated by body fluids,
such as tissue fluid, gastric juice, and intestinal juice,
investigate the antismudge properties of the WPU-g-PDMS
coating by using simulated body fluids as well as acid, alkaline,
and aqueous solutions as the contaminated liquids. Except for
artificial blood, all solutions were stained with a cresol red
indicator to observe them clearly during the falling process.
Specifically, 0.05 mL of simulated contamination liquid was
dropped on the coating surface inclined at 30.0°, and its sliding
motion on the coating surface was recorded. A screenshot of
artificial blood, artifcial tisue fuid, collgen peptide, and
simulated liquids (water, HCl solution, NaOH solution,
any coating), the control (WPU coating without PDMS
gelatin) falling off the surface of the blank (glass slide without
grafted), and WPU-g-PDMS, coating is listed in Figure 8. The
corresponding sliding time was recorded to compare. As
shown in Figure Sa, the test liquids with low viscosity, such as
water, HCI solution, NaOH solution, blood (ART), and tissue
fluid (ART), were able to naturally slide off the glass slides
within a few seconds, leaving behind deep traces on the glass
surface. And the test liquids with high viscosity, such as
collagen peptide and gelation, were difficult to slide off the
glass. As shown in Figure Sb, all test liquids (even the test
anp Hugeo dA au go apgs (pzrq (4soosi mo qm pnby]
sdno pxoqes zepod yo 1 e  ues auqm
to the strong adhesion between the polar test liquids and the
could easily and quickly fall off the WPU.g-PDMS, coating
However, as evidenced in Figure Sc, all test liquid droplets
without leaving any residual traces, which is different from the
blank in Figure Sa and the control in Figure Sb. In addition,
the time for contaminated liquid droplets to slide off the WPU.
g-PDMS, coating was dramatically reduced compared to the
blank, allowing the coating to maintain the surface clean
quickly once it contacts the contaminated liquids.
medical endoscopes.
This
Endoscope lens is often bathed in body fuids with different pH
8.4.4.
values during detection, which demands that the coating must
keep its antismudge properties, especially in acidic or basic
environments, for a certain time. To know whether the
Hd quaagip u paonsap aze ugeo po saudod s8pnusgue
3q Xeu souadaud a8pnusgue aq paua pue suonpos
recovered or self-compensated after destruction, a series of
experiments are designed to investigate. As shown in Figure 9a,
the WPU-g-PDMS: coating coated on glass slides was soaked
in different pH solutions for a certain time before being taken
out to be tested for antismudge properties using an oily
marker.
H “( = Hd) aem u paxeos sem Sueoo SNId--∩dM
acid solution (pH = 1), or NaOH base solution (pH = 13).
Effects of the solution types and soaking times on the
percentage of the ink residual area are investigated in detail,
and the results are shown in Figure 9b. It could be found that
the percentage of ink residual areas of the WPU-g-PDMS
coating after exposure to water or in acid within 5 h, or in base
within 3 h, is lower than 20%, similar to the original, indicating
that the coating remains its outstanding antismudge property
well. However, as long as the time was more than 6 h, the
percentage of the ink residual area increased dramatically,
which indicates that the antismudge peoperty deteriorated. It is
attributed to the hydrophobic PDMS tending to move away
from the hydrophilic environment, which causes the PDMS
layer to disappear from the coating surface. In general, the
endoscopic procedure usually takes 30 min or less. A period of
35 h is suficient for the coating on the endoscopy lens to
maintain its excelent antismudge properties.
a liquid environment with different pH values, this is still a big
functional dewetting layer enriched with PDMS chains c
could reconstruct their antismudge
propertiesafter the
the coating surface was damaged. In this work, the antismudge
restoration ability of the WPU-g-PDMS; coating was evaluated.
The WPU-g-PDMS, coating was immersed in acidic-to-basic
taken out and placed at room temperature (RT) or 160 °C for
3 h to reconstruct its antismudge function. The reconstruction
aq Kq paqenqeaa stem Xadoud s8pnusque aq jo Kuqedes
shrinkage of oily marker
(18%)without soaking,After soaking
PDMS, coating increased, higher than
solutions for 12 h, the residual ink trac
1 of the WPU-g
indicating that the WPU-g-PDMS, coating practically lost its
70%(pH
8
antismudge properties and could not immediately recover
without treatment. This is caused by the migration of PDMS
the PDMS layer due to their poor 
their original antismudge properties with the percentage of the
soaked in solutions with pH 410 almost r
nanaged to regain
ink residual area being close to 18%, especially the sample in
neutral water (pH = 7). It means PDMS segments can migrate
back and reestablish the PDMS-enriched layer on the coating
surface to offer the antismudge property. However, the
restoration capability became worse as the soaking solution
changed to either an acidic or basic solution. Under these
conditions, PDMS chains may be degraded over time in severe
environments. Due to the attenuated PDMS enrichment, the
antismudge performance could not be fully regained on the
regenerated coating surface. As the acidity or alkalinity of the
soaking solution continues to increase, the solution erosion
could worsen the antismudge property of the WPU-g-PDMS,
coating. Under these circumstances, the surface reconstruction
significantly influenced by curing temperature. As evidenced in
reduced dramatically when the samples were heated at 160 °C
for 3 h. Particularly, the residual ink trace area of samples
soaked in solutions with pH 48 was les than 18%, indicating
that their antismudge property was well recreated. Comparing
amqeradua qq ‘, 091 pue aunqeuadus woou pe sqmsau aq
is more conducive to the reconstruction of antismudge
performance. This is consistent with the result obtained from
Figure 7a that high temperature
facilitates  PDMS  chain
migration easier. Once the antismudge property of such NP.
GLIDE coating was damaged, the internal PDMS chains stored
in domains, which act as “nanopools* to constantly support
PDMS chains, migrate to the surface, were moved under the
simultaneous effects of microphase separation and high
temperature, forming a new PDMS-enriched surface.°
WPU-g-PDMS, coating
within pH
capability of antismudge property, the
212
ink trace
WPU-g-PDMS, coating soaked in extremely acidic (pH = 1) or
alkaline (pH = 13) soluti
and 42.9%,
respectively.
This is likely
WPU-g
PDMS, coating is
damaged by the
Generally, devices are exposed to difter
as humid, salted, acidic, or basic conditions. For example,
iueh
endoscopes are frequently used in harsh environments that
contain tissue fluid, blood, collagen peptide, and gelatin, as well
as gastric juice that contains hydrochloric acid to provide an
acidic solution for pepsin or intestinal juice that may provide
an alkaline environment for food to decompose and be
important as the antismudge property for the WPU-g-PDMS
digested. Therefore, the anticorrosive property is just as
coating. To investigate the anticorrosive property in 5.0 wt %
NaCl solution, the control of WPU coating and the WPU-g-
PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) coatings coated on tinplate slides
were chosen in this study.
To compare the corrosive
phenomena clearly, the bottom third of the tinplate slide was
coated and soaked in 5.0 wt % NaCl solution, while the
0°S u pauswqns-geq snq papeooun ssam spuq-omq Bupueuas
wt % NaCl solution and the other half exposed to the air, as
illustrated in Figure 10a. The optical photos of the blank
(naked tinplate without coating), the control (WPU coating),
Figure 10. (a) Schematic ilustration of the anticorrosion test and (b)
optical photos with diferent surface corrosive results of the blank
“(edu uo paeoo Bureo NdA) joguo a (aedu payeooun)
and the WPU-g-PDMS, (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, and S) coatings coated on
tinplate submerged in 5.0 wt % NaCl solution for different times
and the
displayed
antic
sive
oerto
uncoated tinplate progressively changed from dazzling silver to
a dark and dull black after being submerged in NaCl solution
over time, indicating that the tinplate suffered severe corrosion.
Compared to the uncoated tinplate, the degree of surface
corrosion decreased if the tinplate was coated with WPU or
WPU-g-PDMS, coatings. For example, no corrosive phenom-
ena could be found in the WPU and the WPU-g-PDMS, after 5
days, except for the edges. The WPU-g-PDMS, exhibits
stronger corrosion resistance than the WPU because visible
rust could be found in WPU after 15 and 30 days; however,
large-scale rust did not exist in WPU-g-PDMS, The traditional
uapsfis snoonbe ue uog paedaud fugeoo Nd auoquaqem
exhibits low corrosion resistance to NaCl solution.°° However,
the corrosion resistance of WPU.g-PDMS, coating against
NaCl solution is compatible with the solvent-based PU
coating26 because of the highly cross-linked network
produced by castor oil and HDIT and the chemically inert 
PDMS component. Generall, the higher the cros-linking
degree, the better the corrosion resistance due to fewer
channels for water molecules to immerse themselves in the
coating. As the content of PDMS in WPU-g-PDMS, increased, 
the corrosion resistance was improved obviously, due to the
fact that the hydrophobic PDMS chains enriched on the
coating surface would prevent the water molecules from
geting closer, improving the corrosion resistance of WPU-g-
PDMS, coating.
4. CONCLUSIONS
WPU-g-PDMS was prepared successfully using castor oil and a
LICIH (ofjod aq se (% m 0'S>) HO-SWId yo qunoure eus
as the isocyanate, and DMPA as the hydrophilic chain extender
via polymerization, neutralization, and emulsification with
rigorous stirring at 3000 rpm. The corresponding coatings
prepared by WPU-g-PDMS dispersion, which could be
adhered to a variety of substrates, have high transparency
and hardness, good adhesion, and flexibility. The pencil
hardness of WPU-g-PDMS, coating was higher than 6H, while
the nanoindentation hardness value reached 567 MPa. A high
temperature could facilitate the low-surface-tension PDMS
polymer chain migration, and an excessive time after coating
curing is necessary for PDMS to move from the interior to the
coating surface, which was confirmed by the result of the
influence of traditional WPU’s polar groups on the antismudge
higher Si content on the coating surface. To overcome the
properties of coating the WPU-g-PDMS coating might be
cured at an optimal condition of 160 °C for 3 h and then held
at room temperature for 8 h. Several kinds of simulated liquids
can easily and cleanly slide off the WPU-g-PDMS coating
surface. If the WPU-g-PDMS coatings were soaked in harsh
environments,the antismudge properties could be maintained
within 5 h. Even though long-term immersion would cause the
antismudge properties to deteriorate, they could be self
The WPU-g-PDMS coating has good anticorrosive properties
compensated shortly after leaving the immersion environment.
netrorks and the thin hydrophobic PDMS layer on the coating
that are provided by both the highly cros-linked polyurethane
surface. This study offers a practical and eco-friendly method
for producing a waterborne functional bio-based polyurethane
This kind of WPU-g-PDMS coating is expected to protect and
coating with excellent antismudge and anticorrosive properties.
endoscopes.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
 Supporting Information
available free of charge
mi.2c21525.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Author Contributions
the manuscript
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
IT°his
BUCT-CJFH)* (XK2020-13).
Bior
REFERENCES
f. S.; Li, H. J.; Zha
L. I.; Zhal, I.
(7) Yoshimitsu, Z.; Nakajima, AL; Watanabe,
T:Hashim
Beh
82
SAGd)(
(21) Zh
ting
382, No. 123042
(23) Cai, J.; Murugadoss, V.; Jiang, J.; Gao, X; Lin, Z.; Huang, M,
Polyurethane and Its Nanocomp
oosites: A Mini-Review for Anti
Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater. 2022, S, 641650.
(32)
Poly
Oil-Ba
2021,3,5612-3622.
(33) Zhou, M.; Ha, Z.; Lei, L; Xia, Y.; Mao, P.; Chen, X,; Fan, B.;
Shi, S. Castor Oil-Based Transparent and Omniphobic Polyurethane
Coatings with High Hardness, Anti-Smudge and Anti-Corrosive
Properties. Prog. Org. Cout 2022, 172, No. 107120.
W
(41) Luo, H.; Wei, HL; Wang, L,; Gao, Q; Chen, Y.; Xiang, J.; Fan,
H. Anti-Smudge and Self-Cleaning Characteristics of Waterborne
Polyurethane Coating and Its Construction. J. Colloid Interface Sc.
2022, 628, 10701081.
Epoxy-Thiol Decorated Silica Sol-Gel Coatings: Impact of Cross-
linking on Corrosion Prevention. J. SolGel Sci TechnoL 2018, 87,
S04-513.
304-315
(S1) Dong, X.; Ren, J.; Duan, Y.; W'u, D.; Lin, L; Shi, J.:; Jia, R.; Xu,
X; He, X. Preparation and Properties of Green UV-Curable Itaconic
Acid Cross-Linked Modified Waterborne Polyurethane Coating. J
Appl Poiwm Sci. 2022, 139, No.eS2042
X; Lu, Y. Rational Design of Durable Anti-fouling Coatings with High
(S3) Gao, P.; Wang, Y.; Wang, J; Wang, F,; Ma, W.; Zhang, Z.; Men,
Transparency, Hardness, and Flexibiity. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2022, 14, 2915629166.
(56) Yu, F
Waterbc
8922
(60) Yao, C.; Xu, S; Jiang, X.; Chen, J.; Yua
an, X. A. Sin
nple Way tc
Achieve Self-Cle
Chen
uasedsursL XuH pue
Photo
inatedPolyurethan
Influc
M. O.; Ral
(62) Khan
M. Self-Healir
g, K.; Li, Z.; Tuhir
$77, 311318
7655
L; Ta, Y.; Mol, J. M. C.; Terry, H. AL Dual-Action Smart Coutings
(67) Qian, H.; Xu, D.; Du, C.; Zhang, D,; Li, X; Huang, L; Deng
with a Self-Healing Superhydrophobic Surface and Anti-Corrosion
Properties. J. Mater, Chem, A. 2017, 5, 235S2364.
RecommendedbyACS
Get More Suggesticus >
