18 Claims, Ne Drawings
The use of water as a solvent or carrier for polyurethane
tal concerms over the effects of volatile organic compounds
coatings has increased due to health, safety, and enviro
(VOCs) and hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) As a result,
erties that are comparable to solvent-bome polyurethane
coatings. However, various properties of waterborme polyure-
-aapos on paresdtuoo uoqm pots trg Aite ssueco oump
bome coatings. For instance, two-component waterbome
polyurethane coatings may exhibit slower cure rates when
compared to teo-component solvent-bome polyurethane
coatings.
Embodiments disclosed herein are directed to a process for
increasing the cure rate of a two-component waterborne poly-
urethane dispersion coating. The process comprises introduc-
urethdne dispersion coating system. The coating system
-qjod auoquapem juauoduos-oal e ogut aupuzeqjod t Bu
comprises a hydrophilically-modified  water-dispersible
polyisocyanate; a polyol dispersed in water, optionally, in the
presence ofoneor moreorganic solvents; and, optionally, one
or more additives or auxiliary agents. The introduction of the
polyaziridine into the coating system decreases the time-fo-
cure by at least 35 percent.
aredirc
cdtoatwc
tem. The coating system comprises a hydrophilically-modi-
water, optionally, in the peesence of one or more organic
fied water-dispersible polyisoeyanate; a polyol dispersed in
solvents; a polyaziridine; and, optionally, one or more addi-
tives or auxiliary agents. The time-to-cure of a coeting com-
potyazindin
embodiments disclosed in this Summary. The invention is
It is understood that the invention is not limited to the
intended to cover modifications that are within the scope of 50
the inwention as defined solely by the Claims
It is to be understood that certain descriptions of the dis-
closed cmbodiments have been simplified to illustrate only
a clear understanding of the disclosed embodiments, while
eliminating, for puposes of clarity, other steps, elements,
featuresadaectsPronshvingdinary skillinhart
upon considering the present description of the disclosed
orfeatures may be desirable inaparticularimplementation or
embodiments, will recognize that other steps, elements, and
application ofte disclosed embodiments.However, becaus
such other steps, elements, and/or features may be readily
apistoo uodn xs repuo Suarq sosad Aq poueaost
10 to be understood as being_prefaced and n
cated, all numbers expressing quantities or characteristics are
instances by the temm “about”. Accordingly, unless indicated
modified in all
to the contrary, any numerical parameters set forth in the
following description may vary depending on the desired
properties one secks to obtain in the systems, compositions,
and peocesses accoeding to the present disclosure. At the very
leust, and not as an attempt to limit the application of the
doctrine of equivalents to the scope of the claims, each
numerical parameter described in the present description
should at least be construed in light ofthe number of reported
qpos Supunou Anupuo SuAdde &q pue s8p eoguis oc
sonbu
include all sub-ranges subsumed therein. For example, a
range of *1 to 10" is intended to include all sub-ranges
25 between (and including) the recited minimum value of 1 and
the recited maximum value of 10, that is, having a minimum
value equal to or greater than 1 and a maximum value equal to
or less than 10. Any maximum numerical limitation recited
herein is intended to include al lower numerical limitations
30 subsumed therein and any minimum numerical limitation
limitations subsumed therein. Accordingly, Applicant(s)
recited herein is intended to include all higher numerical
the claims, to expresly recite any sub-range subsumed within
reserves the right to amend the present disclosure, including
35 the ranges expressly recited berein. All such ranges are
intended to be inherently disclosed bereim such that amending
to expressly recite any such sub-ranges would comply with
the requirements of35 U.S.C. g112 and 35 U.S.C. 132(a).
40 used herein, are intended to include “at least one”* or “one or
more", unless otherwise indicated. Thus, tbe articles are used
herein to refer to one or more than one (i.e., to at least one) of
g, admexa o em fg apre apgo siofqo pegeef a
component” means one or more components, and thus, pos-
158
sibly, more than one component is contemplated and may be
zmployed or used
whole or in part, that is s
Airy pate
herein, is incorpora
edby'releretkce
extent that the
only to the
existing definitions, staten
expressly set forth in this disclos
eAssuhwtoboten
suremteria
sedes any confficting material incorporated berein by refer
incorporated by reference herein, but which
conllicts
set forth herein is only incoepoe
conflict arises between that
ingdisclo
materal
orne polyureths
and
sare uogeogdde o Jaqumu e u slugooo atuoq-uanpos ol
of ho
isocyanates and polyols or polyamines cmables the formation
tures comprising biader and bardener/crosslinker (and
optional additives or auxiliary agents) may be applied to
substrates and allowed to cure to form polyurethane coatings,
such as, for example, lacquers, paints, and adhesives
As used herein, the term *two-component* refers to a coat-
ajemdas om1 1seaq 1e fuspdtmoo uonisodtuoo xo tmaisAs Su
compositions that mustbestored inseparatecontainers owing
to their mutual reactivity. For instance, two-component poly-
urethane coating systems and compositions may comprise a
functional compound and a separate binder component
hardener/crosslinker component including an isocyanate-
including acompound that isrcactive with isocyanate groups,
tional compound. The two separate components are generally
such as, for example, a hydroxy-functional or amino-func-
not mixed until shortly before application. When the two
separate components are mixed and applied, the mutually
reactive compounds in the two components react to foem a
cured coating.
chemical components that may be mixed to form an active
coating composition that may be applied and cured to fonm a
refers toa mixture ofchemical componentsthat will ure and
“coating composition*
form a coating when applied. Accordingly, a coating compo-
sitfion may be formed from a coating system by mixing the
 asis Sueo a Susudtuos suaodoo geop
thermore, when a list of constituents is provided herein that
are individually suitable for forming the components of the
should be understood that various combinations of two or
coating system or coating composition discussed herein, it
more ofthose constituents, combined in a manner that would
be known to those of ordinary skill in the art reading the
present specification, may be employed and is contemplated.
present specihcation,may be employed and s contemplated
a liquid coating composition in which an applied film of the
As used herein, the term “cured" refers to the condition of
ASTM D 5895—Standurd Test Merthods for Evaluafing Dry-
coating composition is at least set-to-touch as defined in
Using Mechaica/ ecorder, which ishereby incorporatedby
ing or Caring During Fibn Formation of Organic Coatings
reference herein. As used herein, the terms “cure"* and “cur-
ing" refer to the progression of an applied liquid coating
“cured", "eure", and “curing” encompuss drying of coating
composition from the liquid state to a cured state. The terms
compositions through solvent evaporation and chemical
eqamKjod_ wua aq
refers to poly-
meric or oligomeric materials comperising urethane groups,
urea groups, or both. Accordingly, as used herein, the term
“polyurethane” is synonymous with the terms polyurea, poly
-odi, us atL goausg suogegpou pue (eam,ouqaum)
urethane” also refers to crosslinked polymer networks in
which the crosslinks comprise urethane and/or urea linkages,
and/or theconstituent polymerchains comprise urethane a
or urea linkages.
amd
prise at least two mutually reactive compounds. The two
Two-component coating systems and compositions com-
mutually reactive compounds may be refemud to as a binder
and a hardener/crosslinker. As used herein, the term *binder”
refers tothe larger moleeular weight reactivecompound com-
used herein, the tenms “hardener”a and “crosslinker” are syn-
prising a two-component coating system or composition. As
onymous and refer to the smaller molecular weight reactive
compound. For example, in a two-component polyurethane
cogting system or composition, the binder may comprise a
polymeric polyol and the hardener/crosslinker may comprise
a polyisoeyanate. When mixed, a polyol binder and a poly-
tion comprising a discontinuous phase distributed throughout
As used herein, the term “dispersion” refers to a composi-
a continuous phase. For example, "waterbome dispersion”
Busuduoo suogsoduoo o apau _uojsudssp snoenbe_ pue
m pbg noqnor panqusip sonpos ao sopad
Waterbome dispersions and aqueous dispersions may also
include one or more co-solvents in addition to the particles or
solutes and water. As used berein, the term “dispersion"
solutions (i.e., molecular or ionic dispersions), and the like.
includes, for example, colloids, emulsions, suspensions, sols,
As used herein, the temm *polyisocyanate
refers to com-
products comprising, for example, biuret, isocyanurate, ure-
trione, carbodimide, acyl urea, and/orallophanate groups. As
used herein, the term *polyol* refers to compounds compris
-qod apnou sjofjod 'sdnou8 Xxoupiq aaug omq sta[ ge Bu
mers comprising pendant and/or terminal hydroxy groups. As
used herein, the tem *polyamine”* refers to compounds com-
thane coating systems and compositions, two-component
waterborne polyurethane dispersion coating systems
and
compositions may exhibit a slower cure rate (ie., a longer
time-lo-ure) Thepresent inventors discovered that the intro-
duction of a polyaziridine into a two-component waterborme
polyurethane dispersion coating system or composition
increases the cure rate of the coating composition (i.e.
decreases the time-fo-cure)
formed from one-component waterborme polyurethane dis
[eopuaqo se qpns soquadoad w [eug asoadtug o suorsaod
45 resistance and wear resistance. For example, aqueous one-
covalently linked carboxy groups. The carboxy groups may
component polyurethane dispersions may be stabilized with
dau ue tuog o souuzeijod u sdnouf aupuze m peau
-.xoap&q-g = tuuog o salumuma pm asa ouuae-g aegpau
50 mide. In this manner, for example, polyaziridines may be
used to fonm crosslinks comprising β-hydroxyamide link-
agcs.
polyu
dispersions
crosslinks c
nay
compris
and/or urea linkages with a
crosslinker that forms
mprising ureth
persions, However, as discovered by the present invenlors, the
me polyureth
dis
sating syslem or cor
polyurethane dispersion coating system e
Aalerbormc
comprise a hardener/crosslinker comprising a water-dispers-
comprise a binder comprising a water-dispersible compound
compound that is reuctive with the polyisocyanate may com-
that is reactive with thepolyisoeyanate. The water-dispersible
prise a polyol or a polyamine. The water-dispersible com-
dispersed in water. The cure rate of the two-component
pound that is ncactive with the polyisocyanate may be pre-
waterbonne polyurethane dispersion coating system or com-
position may be increased by the introduction of one or more
polyaziridines.
polyis
ates that are hydrc
The polyisocyanate hardener/crosslinker component of a
two-component polyurethane coating system or composition
-eqdje duaeq soeueioostqjod sueao Aue asudmoo Keu
cally, cycloaliphatically, araliphtically, and/oe aomatically 2
bound fre isocyanate groups, which are liquid at room tem-
perature or are dispersed in a solvent or solvent mixture at
ate component may have a viscosity of from 10-15000 mPas
room temperature. In various embodiments, the polyisocyan-
at23° C., 10-5000 mPa-s at 23° C., or50-1000 mPasat 23° C.
In various embodiments, the polyisocyanate component may
exclusively aliphatically and/or cycloaliphatically bound iso-
comprise polyisocyanates or polyisocyanate mixtures having
cyanate groups with an (averge) NCO fuoctionality of 2.0.
mPa·s at 23° C, or 100-1000 mPa·s at 23° C.
samxm spospod 1o sgeospod asudoo 
based on one or more aliphatic or cycloaliphatic disocyan-
afes, such as, for example, ethylene disocyanate; 1,4-tetram-
(HDI);  2,2,4-rimethyl-1,6-hexamethylene  disocyanate;
ethylene disoeyanate,
1,6-hexamethylene
disocyasate
1,12-dodecamethylene disocyanate; 1-isocyanalo-3-isocy-
anatomethyl-3,5.5-trimethyl-cyelobexane (isophorone diso
cyanate or IPDI);: bis-(4-isocyanatocyclohexyl)methane
(H, MDI); cyclobexane 1,4-disocyanate; bis-(4-isocyanato-
40
3-methyl-eyclohexyl)methane; isomers of any thereof; or
combinations of any thereof. In various embodiments, the
polyisocyanate mixtures based on one or more aromatic 45
polyisocyanate component may comprise polyisocyanates or
disocyanates, such as, for eumple, benzene disocyanate
toluene disocyanate (TDI); diphenylmethane disocyanate
(MDI); isomers of any thereof; or combinations of any
thereof. In various embodiments, the polyisocyanate compo-
nent may comprise a trisocyanate, such as, for example,
4-isocyanatomethyl-1,8-octane disoeyanate (trisocyana
nane or TIN); isomers thereof; or derivatives thereof
5,075,370; 5,304,400; 5,252,696; 5,750,613; and 7,205,356,
cach of which is incorporated by reference herein, Coenbina
tions of any of the above-identified and incorporated polyiso-
rne polyureth
disclosed herean
oras derivative polyisocyanales comprising biuret, isocyanu-
The di- and tri-isocyanates indicated may be used as such,
rate, uretdione, urethane, urea, iminooxadiazine dione, oxa-
diazine trione, carbodimide, acyl urea, and/or allophanate
groups. In various embodiments, derivative polyisocyanates
comprising biuret, isocyanurate, uretdione, urethane, imi-
nooxadiazine dione, oxadiazine trione, carbodimide, acyl
urea, and/or allophanate groups are included in the polyiso-
cyanate component. In various embodiments, the polyisocy-
anate component comprises one or more of the above-iden-
tified structural groups prepared from IPDL, HDI, H,MDL
and/or cyclohexane 1,4-disocyanate
modified to be water-dispersible. Hydrophilically-modified
water-dispersible
polyisocyanates
obtainable,
example, by covalent modification with an intemal emulsifier
compristngantoticcatkix,oriotionncgroups
may be formed, for example, from a reaction between poly-
isocyanates and less than stoichiometric amounts of mono-
hydric polyalkylene oxide polyether alcohols. The prepara-
described, for example, in U.S. Pat. No. 5,252,696, which is
incorporated by reference herein. Polyether allophanate type
water-dispersible polyisocyanates may be formed,
example, from a reaction between a polyalkylene oxide poly-
ether aloohol and two polyisocyanate molecules under allo-
phanation conditions. The preparation of such hydrophili-
cally-modified polyisocyanates is descnibed, for example, in
U.S. Pat. No. 6,426,414, which is incorporated by reference
herein. The polyalkylene oxide polyether alcohol used to
sip-am pgpot-eogqdoplq ods aaaspod oedaad
persible polyisocyanates may comprise, for example, poly-
ethylene oxide residues and/or polypropylene oxide resides
Polvisoc
Ihe
ute
For example, carboxylate (carboxylic acid) groups, sul-
fonate (sulfonie acid) groups, or phosphonate (phosphonic
acid) groups may be covalently introduced into polyisocyan-
ates to fom hydrophilically-modiffed water-dispersible poly-
isocyanates. The jionic or potentially ionic groups may be
ofthe polyisocyanate and less than stoichiometric amounts of
introduced through a reaction between the isocyanate groups
sulfonic acids, phosphonic acids, or salts thereof. Examples
amino-functional or hydroxy-funetional carboxylic acids,
55
include, but are not limited to dimethylolpeopionic
(DMPA), N-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethane sulfonic acid
acid
(AAS); N-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminopropionic acid; 2-(eyelo-
hexyl-amino)-ethane sulfonic acid; 3-(cyclobexyl-amino)-1-
60
propane sulfonic acid (CAPS): 2-aminoethylphosphonic
acid; or the salts thereof.
Iffreecarboxylic acids, sulfonic acids, orphosphonicacids
neutralized with a neutralizing agent, such as, for exan
are incorporated in the polyisocyanate, then the acids may be
qns-en°o p o nq up sae ea
adu
tuted tertiary amines. The preparation of hydrophilically-
modified water-dispersible polyisocyanates is described, for
cxample, in U.S. Pat. No. 6,767,958, which is incorporated by
reference herein. Water-dispersible polyisocyanate mixtures
based on trisocyanatononane (TIN) are described in Interma-
tional Patent Application Publication No. WO-01/62819,
which is incoeporated by reference herein.
The NCO content of nonionic type bydrophilically-modi-
fied water-dispersible polyisocyanates may be from 5 to 25
weight percent of the polyisocyanate molecule. The NCO
content ofionic typehydrophilically-modiied water-dispers-
the polyisocyanate molecule
butanol,hexanol, cyclohexanol, benzyl alohol, oximes such
for example, monohydric alcohols such as methanol, ethanol,
propylamine or dibutylamine, dimethylpymazole or triazole,
lactams such ase-caprolactam, phenols, amines suchas diso
is well as malonsc acad dimethyl ester, malonic acid diethy1
malonic acid dibutyl ester
systems and compositons include, but are not lumted to, tbe
Ceu uogssoduoo no tuos.s Sugroo uoisuadsip aunqamsjod
comprise a hardener/crosslinker comprising a watler-dispers-
ible polyisocyanate. A two-component waterborne polyure-
thane dispersion coating system or composition may also
comprise a binder comprising a water-dispersible compound
that is reaetive with thepolyisocyanate. The water-dispersible
compound that is reactive with the polyisocyanate may com-
prise a polyol or a polyamine. The water-dispersible com-
pound that is reactive with the polyisocyanate may be pre-
dispersed in water.
(sqofjod susesjod) suauoouo popunesun Xeougalo
are reactive with polyisocyanates: polymers formed from
polymers formed from combinations of diols and dicarboxy-
lic acids (polyester polyols); polymers formed from combi
nations of diols, dicarboxylic acids, and disoeyanates poly-
urethane polyols); polymers formed from the addition of
alkylene oxides to starter molecules (polyetber polyols);
polycarbonate polyols;and polycaprolactone polyols. Hybrid
systems prepared from the polyol classes indicated above
45
may also find utility as binders in two-component waterbome
For example, polyacrylate-polyester polyols, polyacrylate
polyurethane dispersion coating systems or compositions
polyurethane polyols, polyester-polyurethane polyols, or
polyether-polyurethene polyols may find utility as binders.
form hydrophilically
onic
example, hydrophilically-modified water-dispersible poly-
U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,075,370; 5,304,400; and 5,750,613, each of
late and/or sulfonate groups are described, for example, in
which is incorporated by reference berein. Other polyol bind
In various embodiments, the polyol binder may have a
pemmeation chromatography, of 500-50000 or 1000-1000.
molecular weight M, (number average), determinable by gel
In various embodiments, the polyol binder may have a
bydroxyl value of 16.5-264 mg KOH/g solid resin or 33-165
mg KOH/g solid resin. In v
binder may have an acid value (in relation to non-neutralized
sulfonic acid groups and/or carboxylic acid groups) of 0-150
mg KOH/g solid resin or 0-100 mg KOH/g solid resin. In
groupand/orcarboxylate group content of 5-417 miliequiva-
various embodiments, the polyol binder may have a sulfonate
lents per 100 g solids or 24-278 milliequivalents per 100 g
solids.
groups which are reactiveto isocyanates are suitable for use in
Generally, binders that are water-dispersible and that hewe
systems and compositions. In various embodiments, tbe
binder may comprise an aqueous polyacrylic polyol disper-
sion, wherein the polyol comprises carboxylate and/or sul-
fonate groups. In various embodiments, the binder may be in
the form ofa 10-60 weight percent or 20-50 weight percent
aqueous dispersion, which may have a viscosity of 10-10000
or 100-10000 mPa-s at 23° C., and/or pH values of from 5-10,
69, or 7-8.
Exemplary binders that find utility in the disclosed two-
tems and compositions include, but are not limited to, the
Bayhydrol& products (Bayer MaterialScience, LLC)
composition may be increased by the introduction of one or
morepolyaziridines. In various embodiments, the cure rate of
a two-component waterborme polyurethane dispersion coat-
ing system or composition may be increased by the introduc-
various embodiments, the cure rate of a two-component
tion of one or more tris-1-aziridinopropionate derivatives, In
-gznsjod e po togonpoput op 6q posuauou oq Ku togisod
waterborne polyurethane dispersion coating system or com-
dine selected from the group consisting of trimethyloipro-
trimethyloipeopane tris-3-(1-aziridinopeopionate) (TTAP),
pone
 tris(1-(2-methyl)aziridino)propionate
(VNLL)
pentaerythritol tris-3(1-aziridinopropionate) (PTAP),
combinations of any thereof.
nd
In various embodiments, the cure rale of a two-component
40 position may be inereased by the introduction of one or more
waterborne polyurethane dispersion coating system or com-
polyaziridines in quantities of 0.10-1.50 percent by weight of
the coating system or composition. In various embodiments,
the cure rate of a two-component waterbome polyurethane
4s by the introductionofoneormorepolyaziridines in quantities
dispersion coating system or composition may be increused
of 0.10-1.50, 0.10-1.25, 0.10-1.00, 0.10-0.85, 0.10-0.65,
0.10-0.50, or 0.10-0.25 percent by weight of the coating
of a two-component waterbome polyurethane dispersion
system or composition. In various embodiments, the cure rate
50 coating system orcomposition may be increased by the intro-
1.50, 0.25-1.25, 0.25-1.00, 0.25-0.85, 0.25-0.65,or 0.25-0.50
duction of one or more polyaziridines in quantities of 0.25.
peroent by weight ef the eoatinz system or cc
iposition
waterborne polyurethane dispersion coating system or com-
UIPSOMUEAUT
polyaziridines in quantities of 0.50-1.50, 0.50-1.25, 0.50-
1.00, 0.50-0.85, 0.50-0.65 percent by weight of the coating
of a two-component waterbome polyurethane dispersion
system or composition. In various embodim
nents, the cure rate
coating syslem orcomposition may be increased by the intro
duction of one or more polyaziridines in quantities of 0.65-
1.50, 0.65-1.25, 0.65-1.00, or 0.65-0.85 percent by weight of
the coating system or composition. In various embodiments,
the cure rate of a two-component waterbome polyurethan
possausut aq etu uomsodmoo ao ois.is Sueco togsuadsp
by the introduction of one or more polyaziridines in quantities
US 8,742,010 B2
mpositaon
polyaziridines may be employed. For example, in various
embodiments, equal parts by weight of two polyaziridines
may be introduced into a two-component waterbome poly-
urethane dispersion coating system or composition to
increase the cure rate. In various embodiments, two polyaziri-
dines in a weight ratio of 4:1, 3:1, or 2:1, may be introduced
into a two-component waterborne polyurethane dispersion
coating system or composition to increase the cure rate.
In various embodiments, a mixture of TTMAP and TTAP
may be introduced inlo a two-component waterbome poly-
urethane dispersion coating system or composition to
increase the cure rate. In various embodiments, the weight
ratio of TTMAP to TTAP introduced into a two-component
waterborne polyurethane dispersion coating system or com-
position to increase the curerate may be 4:1, 3:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:2,
1:3, or 1:4.
set-to-touch time or hard-dry time (ASTM D 5895), may be
In various embodiments, the time-fo-cure, measured as
decreased by at least 35 percent due to the introduction of one
or more polyaziridines. In various embodiments, the time-to-
cure, measured as set-to-touch time or hard-dry time (ASTM
D 5895), may be decreased by at least 90 percent due to the
introduction of one or more polyaziridines. In various
cmbodiments, the time-to-cure, measured as set-to-touch
at least 35, 50, 60, 70, 80, 85, or 90 percent due to the
time or hard-dry time (ASTM D 5895), may be decreased by
introduction of one or more polyaziridines.
binder (e.g, polyol or polyamine), rwo-component water-
In addition to a polyisocyanate hardener/crosslinker and a
-sodtus so stmass uroo moesuodsep aunaumjod sog
tions may comprise conventional auxiliary agents or addi-
tives appeopriate for the system or composition end use. For
instance, in lacquer, paint, and/or adhesive applications, vari-
ous auxiliary agents or additives may include, but are not
Iimited to, defoamers, rheology modifiers (e.g., thickeners),
Jeveling agents, fow promoters, pigments, dispersing agents,
catalysts, anti-skinning agents, anti-sedimentation agents,
and/or emulsifiers.
herein may comprise water as the predominant solvent, and
The two-component polyurethane systems disclosed
optionally, one or more organic solvents. Optional organic
solvents may include, but are not limited to, acetone, xylene,
butyl carbitol, butyl acetate, ethyl acetate, hexyl acetate mix-
methoxypropylacetate, hydrocarbons suchas the Aromaticf
tures, butyl glycol acetate, dipropylene glycol n-butyl ether,
solvents (Exxon Mobile Chemicals), propylene glycol
monomethyl ether acetate, N-methylpyrolidone, or combi-
nations of any thereof. The onganic solvents may be utilized,
if at all, in limited quantities that emerge as necessary given
the particular chemical components of a specific embodiment
of a two-component waterbome polyurethane dispersion
coating system or composition as deseribed herein.
polyurethane dispersion coating system may comprise at
In
embodin
least two mixtures. A fist mixture may comprise a binder and
one or more auxiliary agents or additives and a second mix-
ture may comprise a hardener/erosslinker. The first mixture
containers and are not combined until shortly before applica-
and the second mixture are generally contained in separate
tion. In various embodiments, a polyaziridine may be intro-
duced into the first mixture, or vice versa, before the fist
o o poonpom oq Aeu supuzesod e susmpoqmo
mixture and the second mixture are combined. In various
lirst
Invarious embodiments, the disclosed processes may com-
prise introducing a polyaziridine into a coating system by
mixing the polyaziridine with a binder before a hardener/
crosslinkeris mixedto fomma coating composition. In various
embodiments, the disclosed processes may comprise intro-
ducing a polyaziridine into a coating system by mixing the
polyaziridine with a hardener/crosslinker before the hard-
ener/croslinker is mixed with a binder to fom a coating
composition. In various embodiments, disclosed processes
may comprise introducing a polyaziridine into a coating sys-
tem affter a binder and a bardener/crosslinker are mixed to
form a coating composition.
OH ratio) inthe handener/crosslinker and binder components,
The ntio of isocyanate groups to hydroxyl groups (NCO:
chemistry and/or the specific application for a two-compo-
respectively. may be determined based on the particular
o msis uo osuadsp aampod oaem p
composition as described berein. For eample, an NCO:OH
and/or adbesive applicantions. In various embodiments,
ratio of 0.5:1 to 5:1 may be suitable for various lacquer, paint,
NCO:OH ratio of 1.5:1 to 3:1 may be suitable.
various embodin
lisclosed herein by meth
of the
the comp
mixing toge
urdenercrosslinker
the
inder.One
torepolya
lardener/crosslinker compopent and/or tbe binder com
Two-commpoent
described herein may comprise, by total weight, 10-55 per
syslems
cent hardener/crosslinker, 40-75 percent binder, 10-20 per-
centauxiliary
polyaziridine(s)
tems and compositions as described herein may be suitable
coxiting sys
for all areas of application in which water-based couting
50 systems are used, such as, for example, coating of mineral
and wood materials, coating of metallic surfaces (metal coat-
building material surfaces, lacquering and sealing of wood
ing), coating and lacquering of asphalt-containing or bitu-
55 plasties surfaces (plastics coating), under coats, high-gloss
men-containing coverings, lacquering and sealing of diverse
top coats, as well as various adhesive applications, The two-
component waterborme polyurethane coeting systems and
compositions may be used for the manufacture of paints,
sunboe[ eoo aes pue sanboe pauaufd smg soad
as well as one-coet lacquers which are used in one-off and
peoduction line applications, for example, in the fields of
industrial lacquering, and automotive original and repair lac-
quering.
HVIP
be applied by other methods, such as, for example, by brush.
ing, roller application, or knife coating,
intended to further describe the embodiments preser
The illustrative and non-limiting examples that follow are
Examples are possible within the scope of the invention
weight unless otherwise indicated
-dssp aanijod oxuoquxes tuaoodtuos-om1 (t) .mog
had a different quantity of a polyaziridine. The compositions
were fomed from the raw material formulations listed in
Table 1 (weight percentages bused on the total weight of the
compositions)
The compositions were formed by introducing the raw
materials into a mixing vessel in the order listed in Table 1.
The Bayhydur8 XP 2547 hardener/crosslinker was added to
the mixtures including the BayhydrolR XP 2542 binder, the
PFAZ 322 polyaziridine, and the auxiliary agents/additives
shortly before application of the compositions. The compo- 55
sitions exhibited the peoperties listed in Table 2.
25
The addition of polyaziridine generally increased the cure
dsp ajod aoaem odo-om  po aen
sion coating composition as evidenced by the decreusing
times for set-to-touch and hard-dry when compeared to tbe
composition with zero polyaziridine, The set-to-touch times
30 for the compositions with zero polyaziridine and 0.25%
polyaziridine (2.5 and 2.75 hours, respectively) are essen-
tially the same for all practical purposes.
Example 2
Six (6) two-component waterbore polyurethane disper-
sion coating compositions were prepared. Five (5) of the
compositions included 1.24-1.25 percent polyaziridine. The
five (5) compositions containing polyaziridine comprised a
-ejau muagp uf saupuzesjod juaragp oma jo mogeuquos
tive weight ratios. The compositions were fommed from the
raw material formulations listed in Table 4 (weight percent-
ages based on the total weight of tbe compositions).
XAMA/B 220 (Bayer Material Science LLC) is a com
60 cial trade name for TTAP The compositions were formed by
listed in Table 4. The Bayhydur& XP 2547 hardener
introducing the raw materials into a mixing vessel in the order
crosslinker was added to the mixtures including thbe Bayhy-
drolB XP 2542 binder, the PFAZ 322 and/orXAMA/g 220
polyaziridines, and the auxiliary agents/additives shortly
before application of the compositions. The compositions
exhibited the properties listed in Table 5.
The compositions were drawn down on glass substrates
affer an MEK wipe. The Gardner Circular Deytimes (set-to-
touch and hard-dry) were measured according to AS'TM D
C.and 50% relative humidity (A). Theresults are presented in
5895 at 22.2° C. and 50% relative humidity (BF) or 23.8°
Table 6.
The addition of polyaziridine generally increused the cure
rate of the two-component waterbome polyurethane disper-
sion coating composition as evidenced by the decreased times
for set-to-touch and hard-dry when compared to the compo-
sition with zero polyaziridine The addition of both TTMAP 40
and TTAP generally increased the cure rate of the two-com-
-odoo fugeoo mopsuadsp aunanijpod auoquaem juauod
sition more than the addition of TTMAP alone. The addition
of TTAP alone generally increased the cure rate of the two-
Bugeoo uojsuadsip aeqaunijod suoquajem pouodaoo
composition more than the addition of TIMAP alone.
Example 3
sion coating copositionswere prparodhecompositions
Four (4) two-component waterbome polyurethane disper-
cach included 1:1 weight ratios of TTMAP:TTAP. The com-
positions included zero polyaziridine (0:0), 0.42 percent
polyaziridine (0.21:0.21), 0.84 peroent polyaziridine (0.42:
0.42), or 1.24 percent polyaziridine (0.62:0.62). The compo-
sitions were fomed from the raw material fomulations listed
in Table 7 (weight percentages basedon thetotal weight ofthe
compositions).
The compositions were formed by introducing the raw
I5 materials into a mixing vesel in the order listed in Table 7.
The Bayhydur& XP 2547 hardener/crosslinker was added 1o
the mixtures including the BayhydrolB XP 2542 binder, the
PFAZIM 322 and XAMA& 220 polyaziridines, and the aux-
-o aqp jo uogeodde aogaq Auoqs sasgippesuale re!
positions. The compositions exhibited the properties listed in
Table 8.
Ihe
n of polya
xd the
cure
SKOE
for set-to-touch and hard-dry when
Four (4) two-component waterbome polyurethane disper-
sion coating compositions were prepured. Three (3) of the
compositions included 1.24-1.25 percent polyaziridine. The
three (3) compositions containing polyaziridine comprised a
combination of two different polyaziridines in different rela-
tive weight ratios. The compositions were fommed from the
raw material foemulations listed in Table 10 (weight percent-
ages based on the total weight of the compositions).
The compositions were fommed by introducing the naw
materials into a mixing vessel in the order listed in Table 10.
The Bayhydua XP 2547 hardener/crosslinker was added to
the mixtures including the BayhydrolR XP 2542 binder, the
PFAZTM 322 and/or XAMA& 220 polyaziridines, and the
auxiliary agents/additives shortly before application of the
listed in Table 11.
Example 5
Three (3)wo-component waterborne polyurethane disper-
sion coating compositions were prepared. Two (2) of'the
compositions included 1.04 percent polyaziridine. The two
(2) compositions containing polyaziridine compeised a com-
bination of two different polyaziridines in different relative
material fonmulatioss listed in Table 13 (weight percentages
weight ratios. The compositions were formed from the raw
based on the total weight of the compositions).
The compositions were formed by introducing the raw
materials into a mixing vessel in the order listed in Table 13.
The Bayhydur& XP 2547 hardener/crosslinker was added to
the mixtures including the BayhydrolB XP 2542 binder, the
PFAZTM 322 and XAMA& 220 polyaziridines, and the aux-
iliary agents/additives shortly before application of the com-
positions. The compositions exhibited the properties listed in
Table 14.
The compositions were drawn down on glass substrates
affer an MEK wipe. The Gardner Cireular Drytimes (set-to-
touch and hard-dry) were measured according to ASTM D
55 5895 at 23° C. and 50% relative humidity. The results are
presented in Table 15.
The addition of polyaziridines generully increased the cure
rate of the two-component waterbome polyurethane disper-
sion coating composition as evidenced by the decrcased times
for set-to-touch and hard-dry when compered to the compo-
sition with zero polyaziridine.
Example 6
Five (5) two-component waterbome polyurethane disper-
sion coating compositions were prepared. The five (5) com-
positions included 0.92-0.94 percent polyaziridine. The com-
positions each included zero percent or 2.14 percent of
different co-solvents. The compositions were formed from
the raw material formulations listed in Table 16 (weight per-
centages based on the total weight of the compositions).
bexyl aectek
The compositions were fommed by introducing the raw
materials into a mixing vessel in the order listed in Table 16.
The BayhydurB XP 2547 hardener/crosslinker was added to
the mixtures including the Bayhydrolk XP 2542 binder, the
PFAZTm 322 polyaziridine, and the auxiliary agents/additives
shortly before application of the compositions. The compo-
sitions exhibited the properties listed in Table 17.
affer an MEK wipe. The Gardner Cireular Drytimes (set-to-
The compositions were drswn down on glass substrates
touch and hard-dry) were measured acoording to ASTM D
5895 at 23° C. and 50% relative humidity. The results are
presented in Table 18.
Three (3)two-component waterborne polyurethane disper-
sion coating compositions were prepared. The three (3) com-
positions included 0.50-0.51 percent polyaziridine. The com-
positions esch included zero percent or 2.14 pervent of
different co-solvents. The compositions were formed from
the raw material fommulations listed in Table 19 (weight per-
5 centages based on the total weight of' the compositions).
* Dipgsder Gtrol s-Bety1Eher; meger inme CgHOtCHCH(CHy)O)t; awaikbir
The compositioes were formed by introdueing the raw
materials inlo a mixing vessel in the order listed in Table 19.
The Bayhydurk XP 2547 hardener/crosslinker was added to
the mixtures including the BayhydrolB: XP 2542 binder, the
PFAZIM 322 polyaziridine, and the auxiliary agents/additives
shortly before application of the compositions. The compo-
sitioes exhibited the proporties listed in Table 20.
The compositions were drawn down on glass substrates
affer an MEK wipe. The Gardner Circular Drytimes (set-to-
touch and hard-dry) were measured according to ASTM D
5895 at 23° C. and 50% relative humidity. The results are
presented in Table 21.
The
stantially atlect tne
iddition of polyaziridir
The pesent disclosure has ben written with reference o
certain exemplary, illustrative, and non-limiting embodi-
ondinary skill in the art that various substitutions, modifica-
ments. However, it will be recognized by persons having
15
tions or combinations of any of tbe disclosed embodiments
(orportionsteofmybmadewithoutepartingfromtbe
scope of the invention as defined solely by the claims. Thus,
it is contemplated and understood that the present disclosure
g ias fpssandsa jou sapoqma eonpe saeqa
combining. modifying. or reoganizing any of the dislosed
berein. Such emodiments may be obtained, for eample, by
Sleps, ingredients, constituents, components, elements, fe
u s euouq suosad jeauuue ua
tures, aspects, and the like, of the embodiments described 25
at may find uefl. Ths, tis dislore is not limited by te
description of the cxemplary and illustrative embodiments,
Vhat is claimed is
3. The process of claim 1, wherein the polyaziridine com-
selected from the group consisting oftrimethylolpropuane tris-
(1-(2-methyl)aziridino)peopionate, trimethylolpeopane tris-
nopropionate), and combinations of any thereof
5. Tbc
ne 1s
ntro
oelo
13. A process for preparing a coating composition from the
oond; and the polyol compeises a polyacrylic polyol
coating system of claim 8, comprising mixing the polyaziri-
dine with the polyol and any auxiliary agents or additives, and
then mixing in the polyisoeyanate to form the coeting com-
position,
coating system of claim 8, comprising mixing the polyuziri-
dine with the polyisocyanate, and then mixing the combined
polyaziridine and polyisocyanate with a mixture comprising
the polyol and any auxiliary agents or additives to foem the
coating composition.
