Preparation and characterization of UV-curableurethane
acrylateoligomers
modifiedwith
cycloaliphatic
epoxideresin
Zhen Jiao,Chenchen Wang.Oianqian Yang.Xianwei Wang
 Ameriean Coatings Association 2017
Abstract The UV-curable urethane acrylate oligo-
mers modified with cycloaliphatic epoxide
resin,
ethane acrylate (CE-MP-UA) and oleic acid-modified
cycloaliphatic polyurethane acrylate (CE-OA-UA),
have successfully been synthesized and characterized
by *HNMR and FTIR. The kinetics of the synthesis
processes are studied in this paper. The effects of the
molecular structure of the oligomers on the properties
of cured film, including pencil hardness, impact resis-
tance, adhesion and boiling water resistance,
discussed in detail. The experimental results indicate
are
that the films formed by CE-OA-MP oligomcrs show
good comprehensive performance, especially good
adhesion and boiling water resistance due to the
numerous hydroxyl groups, flexible scgment and ali-
cyclic structure of the oligomers. The results reveal
that the alieyclic structure in the oligomer molecular
make-up can effectively improve the adhesion of UV-
curable coatings.
Keywords
UV-curable c
acrylateCyloaliphatipoxid
Cured film properties
215123, Jiar
ngsu, People's Republic ot Chin:
Introduction
green industrial process. In the coating field, the
traditional curing coatings cannot avoid the release of
a large number of polluting volatile organic com-
pounds (VOCs) during the curing process. For this
reason, a greal deal of effort has been paid to develop
curable coating is one of the most promising due to its
environmentally friendly characteristics such as reduc-
ing volatile solvents, fast curing, and reduction in
energy costs.*
 However, UV-curable coatings some-
with traditional coatings.* To resolve this problem, it is
necessary to improve the performance of the UV-
curable coatings.
The general formulation of UV-curable coatings
contains photoinitiator, reactive monomers and func-
properties of the cured film.* The performance gap
tionalized oligomers which mainly determine the
between UV-curable coatings and conventional ther-
mal curable coatings on tinplate painting limits the
application of the UV-curable coatings on tinplate.? In
order to overcome this problem, some modified
urethane acrylate oligomers are synthesized and the
properties of the films cured by these oligomers are
determined in our previous study.10.11 Although some
progress has been made in this research, further
improvement is needed on the adhesion of the curable
film.
To our knowledge, adhesion of UV-curable film is
mainly dependent on the extent of the hydrogen
bonding between film and tinplate, as well as the
shrinkage force during the curing process. Due to its
special molecular structure, cycloaliphatic epoxide
resin is considered to modify the urethane acrylate
oligomers because its epoxy structure can supply the
hydrogen bonding and the
reduce the shrinkage force.
alicyclic structure
cal
mance of polymer materials, development and modi-
on the perfor-
fication based on cycloaliphatic epoxide resins become
more and more attractive.
 Some researchers used
cycloaliphatic epoxide resins for the modification of
UV-curable coatings. As expected, there is a great
advantage in the comprehensive performance
cycloaliphatic epoxide resin with respect to epoxy
of
acrylates. He et al. synthesized an epoxideacrylate
hybrid monomer by the controlled reaction between
the cycloaliphatic epoxy resin and acrylic acid. They
found that the hybrid monomer-cured film formed a
epoxy acrylate and cpoxide.The same cycloaliphatic
more uniform polymer network than the blend of
epoxy resin was used to prepare UV-curable organic-
inorganic hybrid coatings. The formed film showed
transparency. Similarly, the novel interpenetrating
good toughness, great mechanical properties, and high
polymer networks (IPNs) based on cycloaliphatic
epoxy resin were synthesized, and the experimental
results revealed that the resulting IPNs exhibited the
rather high modulus and dense crosslinking network
structure.
Sangermano et al. prepared the acrylic-
UV curing. They found that a reduction of shrinkage
o s  su rod  xo
was achieved by increasing the cycloaliphatic epoxide
resin content in the photocurable formulation, result-
ing in increased adhesion. In addition, the UV-
curable, bismaleimide-modified aliphatic epoxy resin
prepared from N-(p-carboxyphenyl) maleimide
and
cycloaliphatic epoxy was reported to effectively
im-
prove the surface properties of polycarbonate.
cycloaliphatic
polyurethane
acrylate
curable films cured by these prepared oligomers are
are
determined, and the cffects of the functional groups of
the
oligomerson
the
properties of cured film
discussed in detail.
are
Experimenta
Material
hexylmethyl 3,4-epoxycyclohexane carboxylate was
Cycloaliphatic
epoxide
sin
(CE),
3,4-epoxycyclo-
purchased from Jiangsu Tetra New Material Technol-
ogy Co.Ltd.Isophorone disocyanate
obtained from Ketian Electronic Materials Co., Ltd. 2
(IPDI)
EM
Hydroxypropyl acrylate (HPA) was supplied by Jin-
sheng Auxiliaries Factory. Oleic oil (OA). maleic
anhydride (MA), and polyethylene glycol (PEG200)
were purchased from Lingfeng Chemical Reagent.
Dibutyltin dilaurate (DBTDL) and p-hydroxyanisole
(HQMME) were provided by Sinopharm Chemical
Reagent. Tripropylene glycol diacrylate (TPGDA)
used as reactive diluent was obtained from Shanghai
Hechuang Chemical Co., Ltd. Triethylamine
purchased from Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.
was
1-Hydroxycyclohexyl phenyl ketone (Irgacure 184) was
supplied by Nanjing Wali Chemical Technology Co.
Ltd. All other common chemical reagents were of
analytical grade and used as received.
PreparationofNCO-bearingadduc
NCO-bearing adduct was synthesized between the
reaction of IPDI and HPA.
During
the reaction,
DBTDL
was used as catalyst and HQMME
as
found in the literature,
and the synthesis process is
be
shown in Scheme 1.
Preparation of polyether-modified cycloaliphatie
polyurethane acrylate
Polyether-modified cycloaliphatic polyurethane acry-
late (CE-MP-UA) was synthesized via a two-step
procedure.First,polyether-modified cycloaliphatic
epoxide resin (CE-MP) was obtained. Briefly, MA
(19.20 g, 0.2 mol) and PEG200 (40.00 g, 0.2 mol) were
reacted in a four-necked flask equipped with stirrer
thermometer,
nitrogen
anddroppingf
funnel
HQMME (0.09 g) was used as inhibitor in the reaction.
The reaction was continued at 75°C until the content of
initial one. Then the temperature of the mixture was
acid value of the mixture was reduced to half of the
raised to 100°C, and CE (50.46 g, 0.2 mol) was added
dropwise in company with a little triethylamine as
catalyst to the system. The reaction was stopped when
the content of acid value was <5 mg KOH/g by
titration. Second, polyether-modified cycloaliphatic
polyurethane acrylate (CE-MP-UA) was obtained by
the reaction between polyether-modified cycloaliphatic
epoxide resin (CE-MP) and NCO-bearing adduct using
DBTDL as catalyst and HQMME as polymerization
inhibitor. The reaction was carried out at 50°C under
nitrogen atmosphere and stopped when the content of
isocyanate was <0.1 wt%. In this study, the added
NCO-bearing adduct was 42.29, 84.58 and 126.87 g for
CE-MP-30% UA,
CE-MP-60% UA,
andCE-MP-
90%UA, respectively. The synthesis process is de-
scribed in Scheme 2.
Preparation of oleic acid-modified cycloaliphatic
polyurethane acrylate
Oleic
late
acid-modified
(CE-OA-UA)
First,
procedure.
acid-modified
synthesized
cyecloaliphatic
Scheme 1: Preparation of NCO-bearing adduct
epoxide resin (CE-OA) was obtained. Briefly, CE
(60.60 g, 0.26 mol) was placed into a four-necked flask
equipped with stirrer, thermometer, nitrogen inlet, and
dropping funnel. Oleic acid (112.99 g, 0.4 mol) mixed
(0.52 g) as catalyst was added dropwise to the flask.
with HQMME (0.26 g) as inhibitor and triethylamine
The temperature was then raised to 120°C, and the
reaction was continued until the acid value content of
the mixture was <5 mg KOH/g by titration. Second,
oleic acid-modified cycloaliphatic polyurethane acry-
late (CE-OA-UA) was obtained by the reaction
resin (CE-OA)and NCO-bearing adduct using
between oleic acid-modified cycloaliphatic epoxide
DBTDL as catalyst and HQMME as polymerization
inhibitor. The reaction was carried out at 50°C under
nitrogen atmosphere and stopped when the content of
NCO-bearing adduct was 42.29, 84.58, and 126.87 g for
isocyanate was <0.1 wt%. In this study, the added
CE-OA-30%UA,CE-OA-60%UA, and CE-OA-
90% UA, respectively. The synthesis process is repre-
sented in Scheme 3.
Characterizationofthepreparedoligomers
The isocyanate content was
 determined using di-n-
butylamine
acetone
acid value
hydroxyl value were determined according to Chinese
and
National Standards GB6743-86 and GB/T12008.3-2009,
respectively. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spec-
tra were recorded on a Nicolet-750 FTIR spectrometer,
HNMR spectra of the oligomers were obtained on a
and the
 scanning range was from 4000 to 500 cm
Bruker AVANCE 300-MHz instrument using CDCl;
as solvent and TMS as internal standard.
Film preparation and UV curing
The mixture containing 50 wt % prepared oligomers, 45
wt% TPGDA and 5 wt% Irgacure 184 as photoinitia-
tor was coated on tinplate using an applicator and
cured by exposing them to a UV lamp (INTELLI-
RAY 400) in air. The UV lamp was made by Uvitron
International Inc. Its main wavelength was 365 nm,
and the light intensity was 100 mW cm*.
Characterization ofthecuredfilms
The properties of the cured films including pencil
hardness, adhesion, impact resistance,
Suoqpue
water resistance were characterized by the Chinese
National Standards of GB/T 6739-1996, GB/T9286-98,
GB/T1732-1993, and GB/T1877-2007, respeetively. In
addition, the thickness of the films was determined
using a thickness gauge. The detailed information
be found in our previous manuscripts.
Scheme 3: Preparation of oleic acid-modified cycloaliphatic polyurethane scrylate
MP:(b)
MP-UA
Results and discussion
PreparationofCE-MP-PUA
The reactant conversion with reaction time during the
preparation of CE-MP-PUA is shown in Fig. 1. It is
shown in Fig. la that the conversion of MA reaches
99% and then remains constant when reaction is
continued for 1.5 h. Figure 1b indicates that the
reaction between CE and MP is relatively fast. The
conversion of MP reaches 98% at the reaction time of
0.5 h and slightly increases to 99% at the time of 1 h
before keeping constant. Therefore, the reaction time
should be 1.5 h at 75°C for the preparation of MP and
1.0 h at 100°C for CE-MP. The conversion of NCO-
bearing adduct during the reaction between CE-MP
and different amount of NCO-bearing adduct is found
added NCO-bearing adduct leads to the longer reac-
in Fig. 1c. It indicates that the increasing amount of
tion time when the conversion of NCO-bearing adduct
about 3, 3.5, and 4 h at 50°C for the preparation of CE-
reaches 98%. For that situation, the reaction time is
MP-30%PUA,
CE-MP-60%PUA,
andCE-MP-
90%PU A, respectively.
PreparationofCE-OA-PUA
Figure 2 shows the reactant conversion with reaction
found in Fig. 2a that the reaction rate between CE
OA is much lower than that between CE and MP. The
and
reason might be the chain length of OA is much longer
than that of MP, which leads to the greater 
steric
hindrance effect. Therefore, it should take about 20 h
to finish the reaction.
The conversion of NCO-bearing adduct during the
reaction between that and CE-OA shown in Fig. 2b
reveals a similar outcome as the reaction between CE-
MP and NCO-bearing adduct. The increasing amount
of added NCO-bearing adduct also leads to the longer
reaction time. However, the greater steric hindrance
effect of OA structure may cause the slower reaction
rate and the longer reaction time, which is about 5, 6,
and 7h at 50°C for the preparation of CE-OA-
30%PUA, CE-OA-60% PUA, and CE-OA-90%PUA,
respectively.
FTIR
Figure 3 shows the FTIR spectra of CE-MP-PUA with
different UCA group content. It can be found that the
peak for NCO at about 2330 cm~ disappears, indi-
cating that the added NCO-bearing adduct is reacted
completely. The broad strong absorption peak around
3410 cm*
belongs to OH and NH bond of the
oligomers.
The peak at 2929 cm1
belongs to the
vibration absorption of
CH2,
and the stretching
vibration absorption peak at 1721 cm
is assigned to
Fig. 3: The FTIR spectrum of CE-MP-PUA, (1) CE-MP-
30%PUA; (2) CE-MP-60%PUA; (3) CE-MP-90%PUA
bonds of the acrylate groups can be found at 1616,
C=O. In addition, the absorption peaks of double
1383, and 798 cm These FTIR assignments demon-
strate that the polyether-modified cycloaliphatic poly-
urethane
acrylate
oligomers
are
successfully
synthesized.
The FTIR spectra of CE-OA-PUA with different
UCA group content are shown in Fig. 4. Because some
groups of CE-OA-PUA are the same as those of CE-
MP-PUA, their FTIR spectra are somewhat similar. It
around2344 cm
can also be found that the absorption peak of NCO at
disappears
and
the peak
3410 cm is assigned to OH and NH bond of the
at
the vibration absorption of CHy and CH, respec-
oligomers. The peaks at 2942 and 2852 cm belong to
tively. The stretching vibration absorption peak of
peaks are observed at 1447, 1186, and 811 cm
indicating the existence of double
bonds in the
Fig. 4: The FTIR spectrum of CE-OA-PUA, (1) CE-OA-
30%PUA; (2) CE-OA-60%PUA; (3) CE-OA-90%PUA
oligomers
FTTR
oleic
'HNMR
The HNMR spectra of the oligomers with different
UCA draft content are quite similar. The HNMR
spectra of typical polyether-modified cycloaliphatic
polyurethane acrylate oligomers, CE-MP-60%PUA,
are shown in Fig. 5. Some characteristic peaks are
listed as follows: 8(ppm) = 6.44(NHCOO), 5.826.39
(CH=CH),
4.19(-COOCH-),
3.79(CCHOH),
0.893.28(CH, CH).
For the same reason as the CE-MP-PUA oligomers,
the 'HNMR spectra of typical oleic acid-modified
cycloaliphatic polyurethane acrylate oligomers are
determined. Figure 6 shows HNMR spectra of CE-
are listed as follows: (ppm) = 6.77(NHCOO), 5.84
OA-60%PUA oligomers, and the characteristic peaks
6.45(CH=CH), 5.06(CCHOH), 4.21(COOCH),
0.883.65(CHy, CHz).
Properties of cured film
Table 1 summarizes the properties of the cured films
formed by the prepared oligomers in this study. They
Table 1: Properties of UV-cured coating films
+, Good; -, damaged
include dry film thickness, pencil hardness, impact
was found that the dry film thickness of all the samples
is 13.7 ± 0.9 μm. Therefore, the performance differ-
ences due to the thickness of the film can be ignored in
this study,
Table 1 indicates that the pencil hardness of the film
UA, while’ the impact resistance shows the opposite
prepared by CE-MP-UA is better than that of CE-OA-
result. The pencil hardness and the impact resistance of
the film mainly depend on the content of the flexible
segment within the oligomers. Specifically, the im-
proved flexible structure leads to good impact resis-
tance but bad pencil hardness. In this study, MP and
NCO-bearing adduct provides the flexible structure of
CE-MP-UA oligomers, and the flexible structure of
CE-OA-UA oligomers is supplied by OA and NCO-
bearing adduct. Compared to MP, the longer chain
length of OA brings CE-OA-UA oligomers better
flexibility than CE-MP-UA oligomers, which leads to
better impact resistance and worse pencil hardness of
the film cured by CE-OA-UA oligomers. For the same
oligomers series, the increased content of NCO-bear-
ing adduct raises the flexibility of the oligomers.
Therefore, the film cured by the same oligomers series
with higher NCO-bearing adduct grafting shows the
oligomers is better than that cured by CE-MP-UA
CE-OA-UA
oligomers. The adhesion of UV-curable coatings
mainly depends on the content of the hydrogen
bonding between film and tinplate, as well as the
the hydrogen bonding is provided mainly by the
shrinkage force during the curing process. In this study,
hydroxyl groups which are numerous in all the
prepared oligomers. Therefore, the difference of the
adhesion mainly depends on the shrinkage force.
Compared to CE-MP-UA, the chain segment of CE-
OA-UA has the better stretch which can effectively
reduce the shrinkage force. This makes the films cured
by CE-OA-UA oligomers exhibit better adhesion. It
should be noted that the adhesion of the film cured by
CE-OA-UA oligomers obtained the highest level of
the test methods. Also, it is better than that cured by
structure.
The water resistance of the film is strongly affected
by the adhesion. Besides that, the crosslinking density
and hydrophilicity of the film also have some effect on
the water resistance. In this study, the poor adhesion of
CE-MP-UA oligomers leads the films cured using
these oligomers to be damaged in the boiling water. In
addition, the hydrophilicity of the ether structure in the
CE-MP-UA oligomers makes for worse water resis-
tance of the film. Oppositely, the good adhesion and
the hydrophobicity of the CE-OA-UA oligomers allow
for good boiling water resistance of the film cured by
CE-MP-UA oligomers.
In short, the curing film formed by the CE-MP-
60% UA oligomers is observed the best comprehensive
performance among all the films determined in this
study.
In our previous study, some modified urethane
urethane acrylate, epoxy-modified polyurethane acry-
late, and hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate were
Obviously, the adhesion of film cured by CE-OA-UA
is the best among all of the samples. It is mentioned
that the adhesion mainly depends on the hydroxyl
content of the oligomers and the shrinkage force
during the curing process. The large number of
hydroxyl groups in the CE-OA-UA oligomers allow
for the good adhesion. Besides that, the unique
cycloaliphatic structure of CE-OA-UA oligomers can
further improve the adhesion. In other words,
cycloaliphatic structure can effectively enhance the
the
adhesion of the cured film.
Conclusion
In order to enhance the adhesion of the UV-curable
coatings, the urethane acrylate oligomers modified
with cycloaliphatic epoxide resin are successfully syn-
thesized in this study. The effects of the oligomer
structure on the properties (e.g--
pencil hardness,
impact resistance, a
adhesion, boiling water resistance)
oligomers are discussed in detail. The results show
that the curable films formed by CE-OA-MP oligomers
have good  comprehensive
performance,
especially
good adhesion and boiling water resistance
due to
alicyelic structure. The results reveal that the alicyclic
their numerous hydroxyl groups, flexible segment, and
improve the adhesion of UV-curable coatings.
structure in the oligomer molecular can effectively
Acknowledgments This study was supported by the
NaturalScienceFoundation
of JiangsuProvince
(BK20130602), Collaborative Innovation Center of
Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, the Priority
Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher
Education Institutions, the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities and Jiangsu
Himonia Technology Co., Ltd.
References
