Synthesis and characterization of a novel fluorinated waterborne
polyurethane
Jiating Wen,ZheSun°,Haojun Fan,",YiChen°,Jun Yan
State Key Leboretory of Polyrxer Meteriels Eeginrering, &
SicAust Utiersity, Chengds, PR Choiaa
AB ST RACT
1.lntroduction
Waterborne polyurethane (WPU) is an nontoxic and environ
friendly material, which has been used in various fields, such as ad-
hesive, leather/synthetic finishing, textile laminating, plastic printing
and wood coating, etc [15]. Water used as a solvent often results in
some defects stuch as high surface tension, poor wetting and spreading
ability together with water/solvent resistance of WPU on low surface
free energy substrates, which limits it application. Thus, how to im-
prove its weting and spreading ability and water/solvent resistance is
considerably imperative
hydrophobic property of WPU via blending and/or copolymerizing with
Various methods have been adopted to adjust the surface
fluorinated components. Early studies [6] primarily were focused on
investigating additive-type fluorine-based hydrophobic materials to
oaq nq 'dM yo soadoud Supeads pue Suam aq aouruua
geneous dispersion and poor compatibility with wPU cannot be ig-
nored. In this regard, copolymerization of fluorine based monomers
into polymer to endow low surface tension and high water and solvent
repellence as well as maintain the original physical and mechanical
properties of WPU has hereby triggered tremendous research interest.
Previous studies have shown fluorocarbon chains possess relative
Previous studies
tns poss
sess relative
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.porgo
Received 6 June 2018; Received in revised form 9 Ja
003t.2019.02.029
0300-9440/ C 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights :
reserrec
A series of fluorine-containing water-based polyurethane (FWPU) were symthesized by u
terminated isocyanate trimer (F-HIT) prepared from 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafuoro-1-ctanol (TF)
using fluoro alcohol
hydrophobic and solvent-resistance properties of FWPU were investigated n detail. The rsults indicated that
and hexamethylene disocyanate trimer (HDIT). The structure of F-HIT and the wetting and spreading ability
with the increase of F-HDTT, the latex particle size, the water/solvent resistance and elongation at break of FWPU
increased. More interestingly, the wetting and spreading ability on non-polar substrates was enhanced with the
introduction of F-HDIT and the sarface tension of FWPU film/latex was decreased by 69.5%/17.3% Meanwhile,
the water/methylene iodide contact angles were increased from 54.0"/34.1° to 121.8′/90.7" respectively,
showing good hydrophobic and solvent-repellence characteristics
omolecular mai
fluorine. Forthis reason in the later case, Jiang et al. synthesized atye
chains, which leads poor surface enrichment and migration freedom of
trifluoroethanol as chain extender, but they found the
of short side-chain fluorine waterborme polyurethane(FPU) with 2,2,2-
 water contact
angle of solid film was around 90° and further improvement could not
be obtained. The reason they induced is that the fluoroalkyl chains
[11].
Up to now, the preparation and application studies of fluorinated
WPU with controllable surface tension and high water and solvent re-
pellence have developed slowly due to the lack of fluorinated iso-
cyanate and fluorinated diol with longer fluoroalkyl chains. Hence, in
this study, a fluoro alcohol-terminated isocyanate (F-HDIT) prepared
from 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafluoro-1-octanol (TFO) and hex-
amethylene disocyanate trimer (HDIT) was used as raw materials, a
series of fluorine-containing water-based polyurethanes (FWPU) with
long fluoroalkyl side chain were synthesized. Simultaneously, the
wetting and spreading ability, water and solvent repellence of FWPU
were investigated. The aim of this study is to provide a new way to
develop novel fluorinated disocyanate and create diverse functional
polyurethane with controllable surface tension and high water re-
pellence.
Scheme 1. Preparation cof F-HDIT.
2. 1. Material
Poly(propylene glycol) with number-average molecular weight of
1000 gmol (PPG 210), poly(tetramethylene glycol) with number-
average molecular weight of 2000 g mol ~1 (PTMG 220) were provided
by Kelong Chemical Co. Ltd (Chengdu, China) and dehydrated at 120 °C
under high vacuum (0.5 mmHg) for 12h before synthesis. Isophorone
disocyanate (IPDI), 1,4-butanediol (BDO), acetone, butyl acetate,
triethylamine (TEA), 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-tridecafluoro-1-octanol
(TFO) of extra-pure grade were acquired from Aladdin Industrial
0.4 nm molecular sieve for 48 lh. Bismuth neodecanoate was obtained
Corporation (Shanghai, China) and were used after dehydration with
from Energy Chemical Co. Ltd (Shanghai, China). Hexamethylene-1,6-
disocyanate trimer (HDTT) was supplied by Bayer Co. Ltd (Germany).
Other chemicals were used as received.
2.2. Preparation of F-HDIT
The synthetic route of F-HDIT is shown in Scheme 1. A mixture of
HDIT and butyl acetate (weight ratio was 1:1) was added into a four-
neck flask equipped with a magnetic stirrer, a thermometer, a dropping
funnel, a nitrogen catheter. A combination of TFO and butyl acetate
(weight ratio was 1:1) together with 0.1 wt% bismuth neodecanoate
was added dropwise into the flask with constant pressure funnel over a
period of 0.5 h. The reaction was carried out at 75 °C until the residual
-NCO groups reached theoretical value under Nz atmosphere with
agitation and determined according to the method described in the
literature [12]. Product of F-HDIT was obtained after cooling the re-
action system to ambient temperature, The excess unreacted TFO and
butyl acetate solvent will be removed by vacu
um distillation
2.3. Preparation of FWPU and WPU latex
The synthetic process of FWPU emulsion is shown in Scheme 2. F-
HDIT, IPDI, PPG210, PTMG220 and BDO (molar ratio IPDI + F-HDIT:
the three-necked flask equipped with a mechanical stirrer, thermometer
PPG210: PTMG220: BDO = 1: 0.189: 0.094: 0.208) were poured into
and nitrogen inlet. F-HDIT accounts for 5% to 20% of tbe total diso-
cyanate (calculated by molecular ratio). 0.1 wt% of bismuth neode-
canoate was used as a catalyst and the polymerization was carried out
chain extender 3-hydroxy-2-(bydroxymethyl)-2-methylpropanoic acid
with vigorous agitation at 80 °C for 2 h. Then, 5 wt% of hydrophilic
(DMPA) neutralized by TEA (molar ratio of DMPA: TEA = 1:1) with 5 g
acetone as solvent was added into the reactor and allowed the reaction
to continue at 55 °C for 3 h. During the prepolymerization, a suitable
amount of acetone was added to dilute the viscosity of the reaction
system. Finally, the resultant mixture was dispersed into deionized
water with vigorous stirring for 2h. The white-blue WPU emulsion was
obtained and the solid content was controlled to 30%. The preparation
of WPU is as the same as FWPU except FHDTT replaced by equal mole
2.4. Characterisetion
Fourier transform infrared (FIIR) spectra were collected on a
Nicolet IS10 FTIR spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) in the
region from 400 to 4000 cm ~2 after 32 scans at 2 cm~ resolution. H
NMR spectrum was acquired on a Bruker AV-400 NMR (500 MHz)
spectrometer at 25 °C with tetramethylsilane (TMS) as an intermal
standard and deuterated dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO-dg) as solvent.
Electrospray ionization mas spectrometry (ESI-MS) was measured on a
Finnigan TSQ Quantum Ultra (America) instrument. High performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed with an Agilent binary
pump system using a YMC-Pack Pro C18 column (150 × 20 mm; 5 μm
particle size) fitted with a guard column. The eluents A and B are
methanol and deionized water, respectively. The sample was eluted
with a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. Ratios were determined at the isosbestic
point  = 260 nm. The preparation of HPLC samples refer to the
method described in the literature [13]. The thermal stabilities of
FWPU were analyzed by using TG-209F1 thermal analyzer (Netzsch,
Germany) at a scanning rate of 10 °Cmin~ under anitrogen flow rate
of 60 ml-min~. Sample masses of about 5 mg were used. Mechanical
properties were examined with a universal material testing machine
(model tensiTECH) supplied by Tech-Prolnc. (Woodstock, USA) at room
temperature. The samples were cut into dumb-bell shapes with 0.5 mm
in thickness and the test was carried out at a cross head speed of 100
mm-min based on the standard with standard number of BS EN ISO
ata ue a o sou ang peadau sem pod mep upeg 866t-1
carried out on a TA instrument Q800 DMA (USA). All samples were
value. The dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) of the FWPU films was
analyzed under tension mode with heated temperature range from
-80 °C to 120°C at a heating rate of 3K/min and a frequency of 1 Hz.
The average particle size of wPU dispersions was measured with a
Malvern Nano-ZS laser particle sizer (UK).
ThermoESCALAB250Xlspec
Scientilie.USA
The
ssile-drop method
The reported r
equation [14] as follows,
x4) + p(<) = (gs + t)
where y; is the surface energy of solid film, y is the dispersion force,
and  is the polarity force. The testing liquids used were water (L1)
and methylene iodide (L2), and their y, 7, Y, and y, were 21.8 mN/
m, 51.9 mN/m, 1.3 mN/m and 49.5 mN/m, respectively [15]. The
ured by Force Tensiometer (K20,
Scheme 2. Preparation of FWPU
Kruss, Germany.)
Water and organic solvent resistance of WPU and FWPU latex films
were characterized by the swelling ratio of film soaked in water or
cyclohexane, respectively. The film was cut into 30 × 30 mm piece and
dried in a vacuum oven for 24h to determine dry weight Ma. The
sample weight absorbed water or cyclohexane M was determined by
wiping off the surface water or cyclohexane with a piece of filter paper.
The swelling ratio was calculated using the formula: swelling ratio (%)
e pue samn ag paeadau sem agdes yoeg %oo x [°/9  wo] =
OCNR.IN
CONHHR.NC
mean value was calculated
AFM was performed using a SPM9600 AFM (Seiko Instruments Inc.,
Sunddes ug suoppuoo juaque sapun parnbse auam saseuj (ueder
mode using TAP150AI-G nanoprobe. For AFM measurements, the cor-
oo doup auam (uauoo pgos %im 1) suorsnua piqfq Supuodsa
mica plates and then sample by spin coater.
3. 1. Characterization of F-HDI7
Fig. 1(a) presents the FTIR spectra of TFO, HDIT and F-HDIT. For
 Supans aup o suoaq _> Izte ie yed uogaosqe a o
bration of OH, and the absorption peak at 1251 cmd should be at-
tributed to the stretching vibration of CF. Compared with HDIT, a
absorption peak at 2200 cm ~, corresponding to the stretching vibra-
pue _u g9EE te syead uoqxosqe mau pue uewau Is ON jo uo
1577 cm? corresponding to the bending vibration of NH and the
stretching vibration of NH occur [16], indicating the formation of
urethane bond (-NHCOO-) in F-HDIT. Additionally, a peak appears at
1251 cm ~′, which is assigned to the stretching vibrations of CF.
Hence, it can be concluded that the fluoro side-chain was succesfully
attached to HDIT.
au st 1I unnads NN H,  u *(q)1 ) Adoods NN
The molecular structure of F-HDIT can be further confirmed by °H
worthy that the peak located at 7.19 ppm is attributed to the proton
attached to the HN COO  group of urethane bond [17], Besides, the
relative intensity of resonance peak at 2.10 ppm is contributed by the
proton of methylene connected to perfluoroethyl group (label I). The
distributions of other peaks are labeled in Fig. 1(b). The details of H
NMR are listed below. F-HDIT H NMR ((DMSO-d6, 500 MHz) 8 7.30 
6.93 (m, NH, 1 H), 4.24 (s, COOCH, 2H), 3.74 (d, CH, 6 H), 3.34 (d,
NCO CH, 4 H), 3.27  3.13 (m, CH, 2 H), 1.52  1.17 (m, CH, 26 H).
Additional identifications of F-HDIT structure were carried out on
HPLC and ESI-MS and the results are shown in Fig. 2. As can be s
from Fig. 2(a), the HPLC curves of HDIT and F-HDIT have only one
distinct peak and the retention time of F-HDIT peak is longer than that
(positive) m/z 869.4 (M + 1, 29.3), 505.4 (100), 506.4 (28.6), 259.3
of HDIT. The mass spectra detail for F-HDIT is as follows: ESI-MS
(70.7), 260.3 (12.8), 868.5 corresponds the molecular weight of F-
HDIT. All qualitative data provide sufficient evidence for the reaction
occurrence between TFO and HDIT, as shown in Scheme 1.
s.2.TnefectofuorrouponaermatstablyofFWPuim
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was used to assess the effect of F-
HDIT on the thermal stability of synthesized FWPU films. TGA curves of
FWPU under N atmosphere are presented in Fig. 3 and the corre-
sponding detailed data, including the 5% weight loss temperature
CTas%), the 10% weight loss temperature CTasos), the temperatures of
recorded in Table 1.
It can be seen trom
281 °C for control sample FWPU-0 to 241.2°C and 267.4°C for
NH COO  bond was suggested to be the weaker bond and easy to
decompose in heating [18], so with the increase of F-HDIT, the number
% weight loss temperature decreased. According to previous literature,
of weaker urethane bond increased, which causes
s the 5 wt% and 10 wt
polyurethane has two decomposition stages where the first decom
the scission of soft segments [19,20], corresponding to Tμs and T
The value of Tuxi reduced may be due to the introduction of long
contrary, the Tmc shows a slight enhancement with the content of F.
branched hydrocarbon chain and the addition of urethane bond. On the
HDIT increase, which might be arises from the increment of nitrogen
heterocyele. The introduction of nitrogen heterocycle is belie
3.3. Dynamic mechanical analysis of FWPU fimi
Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) was used to study the effect of
F-HDIT on glass transition temperature (T,). The dependence of the
storage modulus (E) and los modulus (E°) on temperature of FWPU
films are presented in Fig, 4. The E' curves revealed that the storage
modulus in the glassy plateau region decreased with the increment of F-
HDIT content, suggesting that the reslience of FWPU was reduced The
reason may be that the introduction of long hydrocarbon side chain
motion. As shown in Fig, 4(b), the E* curves exhibited one peak at
from F-HDIT decreases the intemal friction resistance of the chain
about -50 °C which corresponds to the T; of FWPU, and the peak of E*
curves was found to shift slightly to higher temperature, which suggests
the motion of main chain of FWPU was restricted by nitrogen hetero-
cycle and enhanced polar force coming from F-HDIT.
.4.TneeffectofAuorgroupommecnurxcatpuoprgoFwPUf
FWPU-20 while the elongati
FWPU samples decrease from 18.0 MPa for FWPU-0 to 5.8 MPa for
Fig. 2. a HPLC spectra of HDIT and F-HDIT, b mass spectra of HDIT and F-HDIT
FWPU-0 to 1220.1% for FWPU-20, With the
ase of F-HDIT c
onten
from 0% to 20%,
4.15% to 4.82%
The decrease of tensile strength and increase of elongation at break
and permanent elongation should be attributed to the special structure
of F-HDIT, The fluorine containing side-chain, flexible CH  and six
heterocyelic ring have opposite influence to the mechanical properties
of FWPU films. Although the six heterocyelic rings of HDIT are bene-
ficial for increasing the tensile strength of FWPUI ilms because of its
rigidity, the fluorine containing side-chain, due to its plasticizing effect,
can efficiently destroy the macromolecular interactions, as a result,
decreasing the tensile strength of FWPU films. In addition, the longer
CH spacer between NCO group and heterocyclic ring also pro-
vides the flexibility, both contribute the FWPU high elasticity.
Comparing with the main-chain type fluorinated WPU reported by Zhao
et al. [21], the optimized tensile strength and elongation at break were
5 MPa and 500% or so, from this point, side-chain type fluorinated WPU
prepared from F-HDIT with six beterocyclic rings and long fluorine
side-chain shows more higher mechanical properties
5.5.Tnerelatwsipxetweenjaomecontentadpurtkciesz
Fig. 6 shows the variation of average particle size of FWPU latex
from 0% to 20%, the mean diameter of particle size increased from
with different F-HDIT contents. As the content of F-HDIT increased
25.4 nm to 66.8 nm, correspondingly. For WPU, the latex particles size
is mostly determined by the content of hydrophilic groups (DMPA),
lower hydrophilic groups content often results in larger latex particles
size. In aqueous phase of FWPU, the latex particles retain a state in
which hydropbobic chains are encapsulated by bydrophilic chains.
With the intensification of F-HDIT content, the hydrophobic component
increases which wilenlarge the particles size, on the other hand, the
quantity of hydrogen bonding between fluorine atom and water mole-
cular increases, more water molecular are trapped by latex particle, also
resulting in the enlargement of particle size. Therefore, the average
particle size of FWPU dispersions graxdually increases with the increase
of F-HDIT content.
The wetting and spreading ability on a substrate is the basis and
prerequisite for coating materials. WPU is a type of polar polymer and
shows good affinity to polar substrates. But for non-polar substrates (i.e,
PS, SBS), they are often hard to be wetted. The wettability of WPU to
low surface energy substrates can be evaluated by the surface tension of
WPU latex, the interfacial tension and contact angle between WPU latex
and low surface energy substrates, and so on.
enon caused by cohesive force
between liquid molecules and dependent on the number and size of the
polarity in macromolecular chains. Generally, the lower the surface
tension of WPU, the better the wetting performance on non-polar
fluorine content and shown in Fig, 7. It can be seen that with increasing
substrate. The surface tension of WPU latex can be adjusted by different
the fluorine content, the surface tension of FWPU latex gradually de-
crease from 40.0 mN/m to 33.1 mN/m. The reason should be ascribed
to the surface of FWPU latex was partly occupied by hydrophobic
fluorocarbon chains, which results in lower surface tension of FWPU
latex. In addition, the introduction of fluorocarbon chains reduced the
amount of polar groups in the WPU molecular chain, which is propi-
tious to decrease the surface tension of FWPU latex.
Fig. 4. DMA analysis of FWPU films: (a) Storage modulus (E') vs. temperature, (b) Loes modulus (E°) vs. temperature
FWPU
Fig 6. Particle size distribution of WPU and FWPU
WPU
Fig. 7. Surface tension of FWPU latex with different F-HDIT content
PP filme
decrease to a certain degree, which implies that the wetting ability of
WPU
(,Ex
Fig. 9. Interface tension between FWPU latex with different F-HDIT co
and EVA/SBS/PS/PP films
(2)) [22], the interfacial tension between FWPU and low surface energ)
surface can be calculated:
37.0 (PS), 32.2 (PP) mN/m [23], respectively),
energy of substrates (the meae
asured value
were 36.5 (EVA), 31.9 (SBS),
tensionbeweenFWPUan substrats, repctivelyFig9lists h
the interfacial
between the FWPU and above substrates. It was found that the y, were
EVA and PS have relative higher surface tension compared to SBS or PP
lower for EVA/PS substrate than for SBS/PP substrate. This is bec
content, suggesting the introduction of F-HDTT is beneficial for
cient (Sc) of FWPU on s
The wetting ability can also be evaluated by the spreading coeffi
calculated.
As demonstrate in Fig. 10, with the increase of F-HDFT content, the
Sc on all substrates increases dramatically, meaning the increase of
wetting ability. According to the research of Bao etal [25], it is ne-
cessary for WPU to get a higher Sc (>  20 mJ/m*) or a lower yz, value
Fig. 10. Spreading coefficient of FWPU on EVA/SBS/PS/PP films
10, FWPU-15 and FWPU-20 have preferable
confoemity with Fig 11 which shows that the FWPU emulsion drople
vettability.This
spread ot on all substrates. In adition, the wetablity and spred
ability of FWPU-20 on both EVA and SBS substrates are close to that of
et al. [25].
3.7. Water and sobvent repellence of FwPU films
As coating materials, the water and solvent repellence is necessary
and related to the contact angles (CA) and surface energy of FWPU
films. High contact angle and low surface energy are often used as
important indexes for evaluating the water or solvent repellence of
coating materials.
It can be seen form Fig. 12, with the F-HDIT content increased from
0% to 5%, the CA of water /methylene iodide to FWPU films abruptly
increased from 54.0°/34.1° to 105.5′/79.9" respectively. Further in-
creased the content of F-HDIT from 5% to 20%, the CA of water and
121.8′/90.7". The enrichment of the long fluorinated side chains and
methylene iodide to FWPU films increased slowly from 105.5’/79.9° t0
formation of hydrophobic membrane should be responsible for the
improvement of contact angles. The enrichment ability of fluorinated
component is closely related to their fixed position, for main-chain type
stricted by rigidity of main-chain, so the water contact angle of this type
FWPU prepared by Zhao et al [21], the migration of fluorinated is re-
FWPU is limited to 90.51° even if large amount of fluro polyester was
employed.
larly, due to the migration of ffuorine atoms oeto the surface.
m to 12.2mN/m with increasing total F-HDIT content from 0% to 20%
(Fig. 12b). Generally, lower surface energy and higher water/solvent
contact angles are believed to contribute FWPU excellent water/ sol-
vent resistance.
Fig. 13 reveals the swelling ratio of FWPU film in water and cy-
clohexane. Result indicates that with increasing of F-HDIT content, the
swelling ratio of FWPU film decreased gradually from 19.8% to 15.3%
for cyclohexane and from 15.1% to 4.6% for water, showing 22.7% and
69.5% improvement of solvent/water resistance. This is still atribu
table to the formation of fluorine hydrophobic membrane, which de-
cules [26].
To further confirm the above deduces, X-Ray photoelectron (XPS)
was used for analyzed the surface elements of FWPU. The depth of
detection was around 10 nm from the top layer. As presented in Fig. 14,
the peaks at 284.6, 397.9, 531.6 and 684.9eV are related to C1s, N1s,
O1s and Fls, respectively [27]. Especilly, the intensity of peak at
684.9eV, belonging to the F1s, increases with the increase of F-HDIT
content. The atomic percent of C, N, O, and F on the surface of FWPU
are obtained base on the integration of the corresponding peaks and the
sensitivity factors of elements [28] and listed in Table 2.
It can be seen that the fluorine atom
creased from 0% to 28.19% with the increase of F-HDTT content from
surface in
0% to 20% The result suggested that the flurinated atoms had high
migration performance and aggregated on the surface to form a hy-
drophobic
membrane,
which is responsible for the i
water and organic solvent resistance.
improve
3.8. Surface morpioiogy of FWPU
The enrichment of fluorine side chain on the surface of FwPU film
will influence the surface roughness [29,30], and the surface roughness
oapftq rog (iepoadsa “[te] sauadoud aoejns uo paga qureogru8is seq
phobic surface, influences the water coetact angle [32]
: the AFM 3D ii
mages of FWPU. The
ple FWPU-0
samples exhibit rough
Fig. 11. Photograps of FWPu emulslon dropleB spreid out on EvA/SRs/Ps/PP hilm
Fig. 12. The methylene iodide/water contact amgles and surtace energy of FWPU
Fig.13.Thewater/cyclohexaneabsorptionotFMWPVhilms
mean square deviation (Rq), which is obtained from AFM software
analyses. As can be seen from Fig. 15, the FWPU-o film had the
mn
imum Rq values, with the increase of F-HDIT from 0% to 20%, the
Rq value increased from 0.76 nm for FWPU-0 to 1.34 nm for FWPU-20
eted as follows. When the
FWPU-20 sarface.
water evaporates, a film is formed by coalescence of polyurethane
particles, During the coalescence process, there are some particles with
making the surface rough [33]. According to the analysis above that the
Atomic percent of C, N, O, and F on the surface of FWPU
particle sizes of FWPU emulsion increase with the content of F-HDIT, it
may be one of the reasons for the surface roughness increment. The
other reason for the intensification of surface roughness is the presence
of fluorine substance in polyurethane. Fluorinated segments prefer to
migrate toward air/film interface and minimize interfacial energy
which is roughening the surface. The result of the AFM keeps good
consistent with the analysis of the contact angles and XPS mentioned
above [34].
from the graph, the water contact angle and film surface roughness
show the same variation tendency, i.e, increased with F-HDIT content
mhent of fluorine groups has
great
impacts on hilm surface roughness and hydrophobicity
4. Conclusions
In summary, a series of FWPU based on fluoro alcohol-terminated
tension of FWPU emulsions was decreased and the wetting ability of
isocyanate trimer (F-HDIT) were synthesized successfully. The sturface
FWPU films was improved compared with the control sample FWPU-0,
Meanwhile, the water and methylene iodide contact angles increa
with the F-HDIT content and film surface roughness, highest reached
Fig- 15. AFM 3D images of FWPU, (a)FWPU-0, (b)FWPU-5, (e)FWPU-10, (d)FWPU-15, (e)FWPU-20
121.8° and 90.7", respectively. Simultaneously, the water and solvent
resistance of FWPU films both decreased with the increase of F-HDIT
content. The enrichment of long fluorinated side chains on the top layer
surface of the FWPU films confirmed by XPS was believed to contribute
FWPU high water/solvent resistance and enhanced weting ability. In
general, a novel approach for developing FWPU with low surface free
fluorine content.
Acknowledgements
great help in AFM/TG/FT-IR observation
Industry, Textile and Food Engineering, Sichuan University) for 
Relenences
[1] M. Barrere, K. Landfester, High molecular w
particles in aqueous miniemi
weight polyerethane and polymer hybrid
kciles (2003), http5/7dA.0p/10
