Modification and characterization of urethane acrylate
oligomers used for UV-curable coatings
Zhen Jiaol2 - Xianwei Wang' · Qianqian Yang' -
Chenchen Wang
@ Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
Received: 8 Seplember 2016/Revised: 20 October 2016/ Accepted: 31 October 2016
Abstract Nine modified urethane acrylate oligomers including polyether-modified
polyurethane acrylate, epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate and hyperbranched
polyurethane acrylate have successfully been synthesized and characterized by
Fourier transform infrared spectra. The properties of UV-cured films formed by
these oligomers were also investigated. The effects of the molecular structure of the
oligomers on the properties of cured film, including tack-free time, pencil hardness,
impact resistance, adhesion and boiling water resistance, have been discussed. The
results indicate that the UV-cured film with good performance can be designed by
the modification of the molecular structure of the oligomer. Among the oligomers
prepared in this paper, the cured film formed using HBPUA-50%OA as oligomer
exhibits a relatively short tack-free time, high hardness, good impact resistance,
great adhesion and boiling water resistance.
Keywords UV-curable coatings - Modified polyurethane acrylate Synthesis 
UV-curable coatings and their process have received great attention on account of
environmental-friendly characteristics. They can cure very fast, reduce volatile
solvents and decrease the energy required to cure coatings compared with
conventional thermal curing [14]. The general chemical formulation of the UV-
Center for Nanobiotechnology. Joint Research Institute of Southeast University and Monash
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, People’s Republic of China
curable coatings contains a photoinitiator, reactive monomers and functionalized
oligomers whose structure mainly determine the properties of the cured film [5].
The major types of oligomers used in free radical UV-curable coatings include
epoxy acrylate, acrylated polyester and urethane acrylate. Among them, urethane
acrylate has been widely used as oligomers for UV-curable coatings, as a consequence
of excellent mechanical properties and chemical resistance [610]. However, a
drawback of the urethane acrylate is its strong odor, skin and eye irritancy. Due to its
low molecular weight, there could be high amount of extractables and considerable
shrinkage which cause poor adhesion to substrate [11, 12]. Therefore, great efforts
have been paid to modify the urethane acrylate [1331]. The modified materials
mainly included silicon-based, fluorine-based, epoxy-based, hyperbranch-based and
biobased ones. The relationship between the structure of the modified molecule and
the properties of the prepared urethane acrylate oligomers have been discussed by
some researchers. For example, Han et al. synthesized a series of UV-curable
hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate oligomers and characterized their UV-curing
properties. The effects of different functional groups on the properties of the film were
discussed [1518]. In another case, an aqueous dispersions of castor oil-based
polyurethane/aromatic polyamide sulfone block copolymers were successfully
synthesized by Mohamed et al. [22]. The effects of castor oil-based polyurethane
block on the characters of the copolymers were discussed in detail. In their very recent
work, castor oil-based polyol was used to prepare polyurethane/polyamide copolymer
dispersions [23]. Recently, to improve both hardness and flexibility of coating films,
satisfactory results [32, 33]. These efforts will help researchers to develop coatings
that can meet the needs of practical applications.
Coatings used for tinplate ha
to the performance gap between UV-curable coatings and conventional thermal
very limited. To meet the requirements for coating application on tinplates, it is very
curable coatings on tinplate, the application of the UV-curable coatings on tinplate is
necessary to understand the relationship between the modified molecular structure of
the oligomer and the properties of the UV-curable polyurethane acrylate coatings.
For this goal, nine modified urethane acrylate oligomers including polyether-
modified polyurethane acrylate, epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate, and hyper-
branched polyurethane acrylate were synthesized in this paper according to the
commonly used modified molecular structure of polyurethane acrylate coatings in
the literature. The physical properties of the coatings made by these modified
oligomers were also investigated. In addition, the relationship between the modified
molecular structure and properties of the coating films is discussed in this paper.
Experimental
Materials
Isophorone disocyanate (IPDI), trimethylolpropane (TMP) and dimethylolpropi-
onic acid (DMPA) were purchased from Ketian Electronic Materials Co. Lid.
Polyethylene glycol (PEG200, PEG400, PEG600), maleic anhydride (MA) and
oleic oil (OA) were supplied by Lingfeng Chemical Reagent. Dibutyltin dilaurate
(DBTDL), p-hydroxyanisole (HQMME) and p-methyl benzenesulfonic acid (p-
TSA) were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. The diglycidy1
ether of bisphenol A, epoxy resin (E51, E78 and E132 with an epoxide value of
0.51, 0.78 and 1.32, respectively) were obtained from Jiangsu Tetra New Material
Technology Co., Ltd. Isobornyl acrylate (IBOA) used as reactive diluents was
obtained from Shanghai Hechuang Chemical Co., Ltd. 1-Hydroxycyclohexyl phenyl
ketone (Irgacure 184) used as photoinitiator was supplied by Nanjing Wali
Chemical Technology Co., Ltd. 2-Hydroxypropyl methacrylate (HPA) was
purchased from Jinsheng Auxiliaries Factory. All other common chemical reagents
were of analytical grade and used as received.
Preparation of NCO-bearing adduct
Isocyanate (NCO)- bearing adduct was obtained by the reaction between the
cycloaliphatic NCO group of IPDI and the OH groups of HPA with DBTDL as
catalyst and HQMME as inhibitor. The synthesis process has been described in
Scheme 1. Briefy, IPDI (22.229 g, 0.1 mol), HQMME (0.053 g) and DBTDL
(0.106 g) were mixed in a four-necked flask equipped with a stirrer, nitrogen inlet, a
thermometer and a dropping funnel. Then HPA (13.014 g, 0.1 mol) was slowly
dropped into the mixture by the dropping funnel and stirred at 30 °C. The
isocyanate content of the system was determined by titration at various intervals.
The reaction was stopped when the content of isocyanate reached half of its initial
value. At that time, the value of monoisocyanate was half of its initial value in the
mixture [16, 17, 37]. The conversion of the reaction was 99.0%,
PEG (0.05 mol) with different molecular weight was slowly dropped into the
resultant NCO-bearing adduct and the mixture was stirred at 50 °C. The reaction
continued until the content of isocyanate was less than 0.1 wt%. The added PEG
was 10.000 g (PEG200), 20.000 g (PEG400), 30.000 g (PEG600) to obtain the
polyether-modified polyurethane acrylate of PUA (200) (conversion: 97.0%), PUA
(400) (conversion: 96.6%), PUA (600) (conversion: 95.6%), respectively. The
synthesis process is described in Scheme 2.
Scheme 1 Prepuration of NCO-bearing adduct
Scheme 2 Preparation of polyether-modified polyurethame acrylate
The epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate (E-PUA) was synthesized via a thre-
step procedure. First, the NCO-bearing adduct was synthesized using the process
described in Scheme 1. Second, the modified epoxy resin (MPOH) was obtained.
Briefly, MA (15.850 g, 0.165 mol), PEG200 (33.000 g, 0.165 mol) and HQMME
(0.073 g) were mixed in a four-necked fask equipped with a stirrer, nitrogen inlet, a
thermometer and a dropping funnel. The mixture was stirred at 75 °C until the
content of acid value of the system was reduced to half of the initial one. The
conversion of the reaction was 98.5%. Then, after a little triethylamine was added as
the catalyst, epoxy resin was slowly dropped into the mixture and stirred at 100 °C
until the content of acid value was less than 5 mg KOH/g by titration. Three kinds
of epoxy resin (E51, E78 and E132) were used in this reaction. The added epoxy
E132 was 129.413 84.612 and 50.002 g, respectively. The conversion of the
functional group was 0.66 mol. It meant that the addition content of E51, E78 and
reaction of E51, E78 and E132 was 95.5, 95.6 and 95.8%, respectively. Third, the
epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate (E-PUA) was prepared by the reaction
between the NCO-bearing adduct obtained from the first step and the modified
epoxy resin (MPOH) pepared from the second step in the presence of DBTDL as
catalyst and HQMME as polymerization inhibitor. The reaction was carried out at
50 °C under nitrogen atmosphere until the content of isocyanate was less than
0.1 wt%. The conversion of the reaction for E51-PUA, E78-PUA and E132-PUA
was 96.7, 97.0 and 97.5%, respectively. The synthesis process is described in
Scheme 3.
The epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate (E-PUA) was synthesized via a three-
step procedure. First, the NCO-bearing adduct was synthesized using the process
described in Scheme 1. Second, the modified epoxy resin (MPOH) was obtained.
Briefly, MA (15.850 g, 0.165 mol), PEG200 (33.000 g, 0.165 mol) and HQMME
The hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate (HBPUA-OA) was synthesized via a
three-step procedure. First, the NCO-bearing adduct was synthesized using the
process described in Scheme 1. Second, the oleic acid-modified hyperbranched
polyester (HBP-OA) was obtained. Briefy, TMP (13.417 g, 0.1 mol) and p-TSA
(0.536 g) were added in a four-necked flask equipped with a stirrer, nitrogen inlet, a
thermometer and a dropping funnel. After the mixture was melted at a temperature
Seheme 3 Preparation cf epoxy-modifed polyurethane acrylafe
of 140 °C, DMPA (120.717 g, 0.9 mol) was added in batches to the melted mixture.
The reaction was continued at 140 °C until the content of acid value was less than
10 mg KOH/g by titration. The conversion of the reaction was 97.2%. Then the
temperature of the system was raised to 170 °C and the oleic acid was slowly
dropped into the mixture. The reaction was continued until the content of acid value
was less than 10 mg KOH/g by titration. The added oleic acid was 84.741 g
(0.3 mol), 169.482 g (0.6 mol) and 254.223 g (0.9 mol) to obtain the different
proportions of oleic acid-modified hyperbranched polyesters as HBP-25%OA
(conversion: 95.6%), HBP-50%OA (conversion: 96.6%) and HBP-75%OA (con-
version: 97.0%), respectively. Third, the hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate
obtained from the first step (70.486 g, 0.2 mol) and the oleic acid-modified
hyperbranched polyester obtained from the second step with DBTDL as catalyst and
HQMME as polymerization inhibitor. The reaction was carried out at 50 °C under
nitrogen atmosphere until the content of isocyanate was less than O.1 wt%. The
conversion of the reaction for HBPUA-25%OA, HBPUA-50%OA and HBPUA-
75%OA was 97.1, 96.1 and 95.2%, respectively. The synthesis process is described
in Scheme 4.
The curing experiments were performed in air. The prepared oligomer (50 wt%) with
45 wt% IBOA was
%1mCumpoxuu
.TheUV
Scheme4Pteparationofhyperbanchedpolyurethaneacrylat
irradiation was a UV lamp (INTELLI-RAY 400) made by Uvitron Int
re to UV i
of the
coatings
just their tack-free
Characterization
Chemical analysis
The isocyanate content (NCO%) was determined according to the di-n-butylamine
y value and hydroxyl value
Forier transforminfrared spectro
I'h
Th
4000 to
Considering that the purpose of the modification is to meet the practical application
in the tinplate, the properties of the coating should achieve the standard of the
practical product. Therefore, the properties include pencil hardness, impact
resistance, adhesion and boiling water resistance, measured according to the
Chinese National Standards (GB) by some researchers [3941]. Specifically, the
thickness of the cured films was measured with a thickness gauge (Qua Nix 4500).
The pencil hardness was tested according to GB/T 6739-1996 using a Pencil
Hardness Tester (BGD 506/3). The impact resistance of the cured films (GB/T1732-
1993) was measured with a DuPont Impact Tester (BGD 304). The adhesion of the
cured films (GB1720-79) was tested with an automatic circle adhesion tester (BGD
Instruments (Guangzhou) Co., Ltd. In addition, the boiling water resistance of the
film was tested in accordance with GB/T1877-2007.
FT-ikanalvsi
Figure 1 shows the FT-IR spectra of PUA (200), PUA (400) and PUA (600).
Obviously, the peak for NCO at 2275 cm disappears, while the peak for NH
stretching vibration at 3337 cm′ and the NH bending vibration at 1535 cm′ can
be found, indicating that NCO-bearing adduct is reacted completely. The peaks at
1721 and 1112 cm  are assigned to C=O and COC, respectively. Three
absorption peaks are observed at around 1637, 1450 and 810 cm ′, indicating the
existence of double bonds of the acrylate groups. The peaks at 2956 and 2871 cm1
can be assigned to the stretching vibration for CH and CH,. These FT-IR
assignments  demonstrate that the  polyether-modified polyurethane acrylate
oligomers are successfully prepared.
Figure 2 shows the FT-IR spectra of E51-PUA, E78-PUA and E132-PUA. Some
peaks in Fig. 2 are similar to Fig. 1. For example, the peak disappeared at
2275 cm1 for NCO indicating that the NCO-bearing adduct reacted completely,
the peaks at 1620, 1450 and 810 cm
prove the existence of the double bonds of
the acryl groups, and the peaks at 2956 and 2863 cm
 belong to the stretching
Fe.1FT-lkspectraatpolvether-modincdolyuethakcrylaeolgouct
Fig. 2 FT-IR spectra ot epoxy-moditied pelyurethane acrylate eligome
vibration for CH, and CH,. Compared with Fig. 1, the much stronger absorption
peak around 3387 cm~ indicates that there is a certain amount of hydroxyl groups
residual in the molecule. These FT-IR assignments demonstrate that the epoxy-
HBPUA-75%OA. Similar absorption peaks as in Fig. 2 appeared indicating the
presence of C=C, OH, C=O,COC
and NH groups. This in turn proves that
Properties of cured film
Tack-free time
Figure 4 shows the tack-free time of the UV-curable coating systems. The results
indicate that the tack-free time depends on the content of the double bond structure
of the systems. Benefit for the highest content of the double bond structure, the
coating system consisting of epoxy-modied polyurethane acrylate has the minimal
tack-free time. The same phenomenon could be also observed during the curing
process of the same oligomer type with different degrees of modification. For
example, the tack-free time of coating films cured with hyperbranched polyurethane
acrylate system decreases in the order of HBPUA-25%OA, HBPUA-50%OA and
HBPUA-75%OA, which just followed the content of the active double bond
structure in the oligomer.
It shc
nents in the oligomer molecular have little effect on the tack-free time of
the coating system. The main reason is that the activity of the double bond of maleic
anhydride and oleic acid segments is much lower than that of the acrylate segment.
In short, the increased content of the active double bond in the oligomer decides its
tack-free time.
Pencit hardness and impact resistance
The pencil hardness and the impact resistance of coatings mainly depend on the
chain flexibility of the molecule and cross-linking density of the coating [42].
Specifically, the improved flexible structure of the oligomer enhances the impact
resistance of the film, but leads to reduction of hardness of the film. However, the
ig.4Tack-freetimeodcoatingtilm
s curedwithditerentmodinedGligoller
improved cross-linking density of the coating plays the opposite effect. In our
knowledge, it is very hard to improve the hardness and impact resistance at the same
time by the modification of the oligomer. In general, the curing film with good
flexibility and low cross-linking density represents the good impact resistance but
poor pencil hardness, while the properties of good hardness and poor impact
resistance would be obtained with poor flexibility and high cross-linking density. In
our coating systems, the content of the double bond of the system determines the
cross-linking density of the film. And the polyethylene glycol segment, maleic
anhydride polyethylene glycol monoester segment and oleic acid segment present
the flexible structure of polyether-modified polyurethane acrylate, epoxy-modified
odsa ae eanod pqdq pe aee suno
Figure 5 shows the pencil hardness and impact resistance of coating films cured
with different oligomers. The results demonstrate the previous discussion about the
effect of the chain flexibility and cross-linking density on the property of pencil
hardness and impact resistance. Figure 5 also indicates that the hardness and
flexibility of the coating films can be controlled by adjusting the content of the
double bond and the flexible structure of the coating systems.
The adhesion of the cured films is presented in Fig. 6. It indicates that the adhesion
of the films formed by the epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate and hyperbranched
polyurethane acrylate are better than those formed by the polyether-modified
polyurethane acrylate. The reason might due to the plenty of hydroxyl groups in the
epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate molecule and the hyperbranched polyur-
ethane acrylate molecule. These hydroxyl groups can form the hydrogen bonding
between the film and the tinplate, resulting in improving the adhesion of the film. At
Fig. 5 Pencil hardness amd impact resistance of coating films cured with different oligomets
Fig. 6 Adbeston of coating films cured with different oligomers
the same time, the increased content of the fexible chain segment in the oligomer
molecule can reduce the shrinkage force during the curing process. It can also
improve the adhesion of the cured film. Oleic acid acts as the flexible segment for
the hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate. Therefore, the enhanced content of oleic
acid in the hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate molecule can improve the adhesion
of the film; however, it will reduce the hydroxyl group content in the coating at the
same time. For these reasons, optimized adhesion could be preferred by adding the
appropriate amount of oleic acid for the hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate.
Boiling water resistance
The boiling water resistance of the cured films is shown in the right side column of
Table 1. It is observed that the cured films formed by the hyperbranched
polyurethane acrylate system show the best boiling water resistance among the
tested films. In our knowledge, the boiling water resistance is mainly dependent on
the adhesion and the cross-linking density of the film. Good boiling water resistance
can be obtained by films with good adhesion and high cross-linking density which
can be supplied by the rich content of hydroxyl groups and double bond structure in
the oligomer molecule of our UV-curable coating system. Therefore, due to their
highest content of hydroxyl group and double bond structure among the tested
oligomers, the films cured by hyperbranched polyurethane acrylate are found to
have the best boiling water resistance.
Table 1 summarizes the determined properties of the coating films formed by the
oligomers prepared in this manuscript. The effects of the oligomer structure on the
properties of the coating films have been discussed in the previous paragraph. It can
be concluded that (a) the active double bond determines the tack-free time; (b) the
chain flexibility and double bond content decide the hardness and impact resistance;
(c) the hydroxyl group and the flexible chain segment in the oligomer molecule can
improve the adhesion; and (d) the adhesion and cross-linking density affect the
boiling water resistance. The film with good performance can be predicted and
designed by modification of the oligomers obeying the above conclusions. Due to its
Table 1 Properties of UV-cured coating tilms using various moditied urethane acrylate oligomer
+ Good,  damaged
Conclusion
To reveal the relationship between the modified molecular structure and properties
of the UV-curable polyurethane acrylate films used for inplate coating, nine
modified urethane acrylate oligomers including polyether-modified polyurethane
acrylate, epoxy-modified polyurethane acrylate and hyperbranched polyurethane
acrylate were successfully synthesized in this study. The properties of the UV-
curable films formed by these oligomers were determined. The effects of the
molecular structure (e.g., active double bond, flexible chain segment, hydroxyl
group) of the oligomers on the properties of cured film, which are tack-free time,
pencil hardness, impact resistance, adhesion and boiling water resistance, are
discussed. The results indicate that the film with good performance can be predicted
and obtained by modifying the molecular structure of the oligomer. Among the
oligomers synthesized in this paper, the coating film formed by HBPUA-50%OA as
oligomer is observed to have the best comprehensive performance and exhibits a
relatively short tack-free time, high hardness, good impact resistance great adhesion
and boiling water resistance.
acd
References
and Polymers 2:141147
oMthepropertiesotUV-curei
a K (1993) Rece
aces in UV-
 Technol 65:4957
12. Mass
m F, Deck
rek T.Schw
