Preparation and properties of super hydrophobic films from siloxane
SiO2
Guomin Wuab,-, Di Liu", Jian Chen, Guifeng Liu", Zhenwu Kong
try af Fa
ogF ef Far
00091, Chins
AB STRAC T
1.Introductiot
With the increasing strict environmental regulation of volatile or
squa (SdVH) sueqnjod ape smoprezerq pue (SOOA) spumoduoo o{ue8
sions, the use of solvent based polyurethanes has been widely restricted
in coatings and adhesives industries.
Waterborme polyurethanes
(WPUs), as a lkind of green organic polymer materials, have been widely
applied in adbesives, coatings and inks industries due to their ad-
vantages in environmental friendly, non-toxic and fire safety compared
with solvent based systems [15]. However, most WPUs are linear
thermoplastic polymers with hydrophilic ionic groups in the main
chain, so the mechanical properties and water resistance of wPU are
lower than those of solvent-based counterparts [68]. Two-component
waterborme polyurethane (2K-WPU), which typically consists of hy-
isocyanate, is an extemal cross-linking way to offer attractive potential
droxy-functional resin dispersion and hydrophilically modified poly
in WPU enhancement by increasing cross-linking density among water
t.2018.06.016
nred
Namocomposite hiln
he svrface of sili
with super hydrophobtc
SiO. Firstly, nano SiOz prepared by StOber
with trimethylethoxysilane (TMES), in order to cover a layer of hydrophob
nano SIO. Then, a series of nar
SiO, on the
and hydrophobicity of film
surface were investigated. The
became
rougher and the 
films was increased obviously with the increase of the content of hydrophobic nano SiO?. Super hydrophob
posite film with water contact angle over 15o" was saccessfully fabricated by using polysiloxae
SiO2 as
dispersed particles. 2K-WPU has almost the same high performance of
wonedde Apeuouuoo umou8 seq pue sueaunijod paseq puaapos
in coating and adhesive fields over the last decade [912]. However,
unlike the homogeneous flm formation of solvent-based two-compo
nent polyurethane systems, the film formation of 2K-WPU is a com
plicated heterogeneous phase process including water volatilizing,
particle merging and chemical croslinking, and the film compactness
of 2K-WPU is not as good as that of solvent-based film. Moreover, due
to the presence of hydrophilic groups in the main chain, the water and
stain resistance of 2K-WPU are still weaker compared with traditional
solvent-based polyurethane, and are still needed improvement to satisfy
the highly diversified demands of society.
surface
higl
WPU
publications were about investigation of siloxane-modified 2K-WPU.
Faai Zhang et al. prepared siloxane-modified 2K-WPU using a siloxane-
showed the amount of siloxane had an important effect on the prop-
modified acrylic emulsion as the hydroxyl component and the results
erties of 2K-WPU [17]. Shujing Yue et al. modified 2K-WPU with 3-
aminopropyltriethoxysilane, and the modified 2K-WPU films had ex-
cellent thermal stability, tensile strength, and solvent resistance [18].
Zhen Ge et al. synthesized a series of siloxane-modified 2K-WPU with
better thermal stability owing to the formation of SiOSi croslinking
network and good surface properties due to the enrichment of siloxane
chains on the surface of films compared with conventional 2K-WPU
[61】
Materials with super hydrophobic surfaces have recently attracted
great interests for the wide applications in self-cleaning surfaces, anti-
fouling or antifog coatings, stain resistant textiles [2023]. There are
Lotus state (aspecial case of Cassie's state), Wenze’s state, ecko state,
several states of super hydrophobic surfaces identified: Cassie's state,
and so on [24]. Among them, Lotus state super hydrophobic surface
with a water contact angle greater than 150°has received significant
attention due to its easy fabrication and potential in industrial appli-
cations [2527]. Research reveals that both micro/nanostructure sur-
face roughness and low surface energy account for the super hydro-
phobicity.Inour  previous
 work, bydroxypropyl terminated
polydimethylsiloxane (HTPDMS) was introduced into the molecular
The results showed water contact angle of the films increased from 71°
structure of 2K-WPU to improve the water resistance of the films [28].
5.0% when HTPDMS content in the films increased from 0% to 10%.
to 96° and water absorption ratio of the films decreased from 6.6% to
However, the water contract angle kept invariant despite the HTPDMS
content increased continuously over 10%. So only introducing low
surface energy materials into films could not create a super hydro-
phobic surface. In this paper, we tried to creating micro/nanostructure
on the surfaces of the siloxane-modified 2K-WPU flms from epoxy resin
(EP) / polyurethane (PU) composite polymer by incorporating hydro-
phobic modified nano SiO, The effects of nano SiO content on surface
morphology, hydrophobicity and thermal properties of the films were
investigated by scanning electron microscope (SEM), contact angle
analyzer, thermo gravimetric analyzer (TG) and differential scanning
calorimetry (DsC), respectively.
.Experumenta
2.1. Materials
Terpene-maleic ester type epoxy resin (TME) with endocyclic
structure (Fig. 1) and epoxy value of 3.5 mmol g, was synthesized
from turpentine, maleic anhydride and epichlorohydrin [29]. 2,4-to-
luene disocyanate (TDl) was supplied by Gansu Yinguang Chemical
uA
Industry Group  Co.,  Ltd. Hydroxypropyl terminated  poly-
dimethylsiloxane (HTPDMS, M, = 2000) was obtained from Shanghai
Silicone Industry and Trade Co., Ltd. Neopentyl glycol (NPG), 2,2-bis
(hydroxymethyl) propionic acid (DMPA), tetraethoxysilane (TEOS),
methyl triethoxysilane (MTES) and trimethylethoxysilane (TMES) were
purchased from Aladdin Industrial Co., China. N, N-dimethylethanola-
mine and boron fluoride ethyl ether were supplied by Shanghai Ling-
feng Chemical Reagent, Co., Ltd., China. Acetone, ammonia and alcohol
were obtained from Nanjing Chemical Reagent, Co., Ltd., China. The
hydrophilically modified hexamethylene disocyanate (HDl) tripolymer
(Fig. 1) with isocyanate group (-NCO) content of 13% and solid content
of 80 wt % was supplied by Wuhan Shiquanxing Polyurethane Tech-
nology Co., Ltd., China.
2.2.PreparatianorH7PDMS-modlhedTMEbasedpoyoldisperstor
Firstly, a TME based polyol (T-N) was synthesized as follow (Schel
1): A 500 mL four-necked flask equipped with stirrer, dropping funel,
thermometer, condenser, and heating mantle was charged with 100.0 g
TME, 36.4 g NPG and 5.0 g acetone. After the reactants well-mixed,
1.0 g boron fluoride ethyl ether was added drop by drop in about 1 min
with constant stirring when the temperature was raised to 90 °℃. The
reaction was continued for 1 h at 100110°C. The product was diluted
in acetone with a concentration of 70% (w/w), and a yellow trans-
parent product T-N was obtained.
134.3136.0 (CHCHin endocyelic structure); 63.969.7
T-N,
(OCH, CHOH, CHOH); 54.2 (OC0CH); 43.5 (quaternary
carbon connected with isopropyl:; 32.135.9(CHCHg in en
docyclic structure); 30.1 (quaternary carbon connected with methyl);
28.7 (CH in isopropyl); 22.4 (CHs connected with quatermary
carbon); 16.1, 18.6 (CH in isopropyl). FT-IR (cm~#): 3000370
(OH, NH); 1738 (CO); 2954, 2876, 1458, 1376 (CHs, CH); 1161,
1066, 1024 (COC, COH).
placed in a 500 mL four-necked fliask equipped with stirrer, dropping
as follow (Scheme 2): 4.2 g DMPA, 10.9 g TDI and 15.6 g acetone were
funnel, thermometer, condenser, and heating mantle. The mixture was
heated to 56 °C (the reflux temperature of acetone) and reacted for 3 h
with constant stirring. Then, 46.9 g T-N and 4.9 g HTPMDS were added
into the four-necked flask. The reaction was continued for 45 h at
about 60 °C, and a yellow product was obtained. 2.8 gN, N-dimethy-
lethanolamine was added drop by drop in about 1 min and continued
stirring for 30 min. The reaction product was dispersed with water di-
rectly at stirring rate of 5001000 rpm at 60°C, and the water was
added drop by drop in about 30 min and then continued stirring for
30 min. Finally, an anionic HTPDMS-modified TME based polyol
(ASTP) dispersion with a solid content of 35 wt % was obtained after
removal of acetone by a rotary evaporator under reduced pressure. The
Table 1
ASTP, H NMR (300 MHz, CD,COCD, 8): &.80 (OCONH);
5.856.15(CH=CH in  endocyelic structure);
7.027.16,
7.658.20
sualopfu
Jo
4.014.20
benzene);
(CHOCONH); 3.403.80 (OCH, CHOH, CHOH);
2.102.26 (CH,C); 0.11 (CHsSi). 13C NMR (300 MHz, CD,COCD,
8): 172.5 (CC00); 152.6 (0C0NH); 136.5, 130.1, 125.1,
114.1, 112.6 (aromatic carbon); 61.670.5 (OCHz, CHOH,
(CHC); 0.02 (CHSi). FT-IR (cm): 30003700 (OH, NH);
CHOH); 20.4 (CHs); 40.8, 30.0 (quatermary carbon); 16.8
1730, 1710 (CO); 2954, 2869, 1462, 1375 (CH, CH,); 1600, 1532
(benzene ring); 1260, 800 (Si(CH)); 1178, 1110, 1057 (-C0C,
(HO‘ISO!S
Scheme 1. Synthesis of TME based polyol modified with neopentyl glycol
2.3. Preparation and hydrophobic modification of nano SiO
Nano SiO, was prepared according to Stober method [30]. A 250 mL
four-necked flask equipped with stirrer, dropping funnel, thermometer,
condenser and heating mantle was charged with 84 g alcohol, 1.0 g
ammonia and 3.46 g distilled water. The mixture was heated to 60 °C
with constant stirring, and a mixing solution of 20 g TE0S and 42 g
alcohol were added into the flask quickly. Afer the mixture reacted for
u paueqo sem is oueu papoun jo osuadsns e09 1e q
a mixing solution of 1.0 g TMES and 4.0 g alcohol was added into the
flask and the reaction was continued for 2h at 60 °C to modify the nano
SiO. Then the suspension was repeatedly centrifuged and washed with
alcohol till the solution appeared to be neutral. After vacuum drying,
hydrophobic modified nano SiOz powder was obtained.
Technical parameters of ASTP resin and its dispersion.
Seheme 3. Preparation of hydrophobic nano SiO
2.4. Preparation of 
modlfted 2K-WPL
The nano SiO powder was mixed in the ASTP dispersion under
sonication for 10 min at a 900 W ultrasonic power. Then the mixture
was further blended with the hydrophilically modified HDI tripolymer
in molar ratio of hydroxyl group to isocyanate group 1:1.2. The well-
mixed blend dispersion was diluted with distilled water to the solid
content of 30 wt %, and then degassed under vacuum at ambient
temperature. Subsequently, the resulting dispersion was cast on clean
the reaction between NCO groups and OH groups, samples were
tin plates and dried for 24 h at room temperature. In order to complete
im sug ajsodoooueu jo saas y s aoj , 0 le uaso aq u paun
a thickness of approximately 0.5 mm were obtained by regulating the
content of SiO over the range of 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20% by weight in
relation to siloxane modified 2K-WPU, and denoted as 0%, 5%, 10%,
15% and 20%, respectively.
2.5. Chorecterisations
FT-IR spectra of the samples were recorded on a Nicolet IS10
Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (Nicolet, Mad
USA) in an attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode. An average of 32
NMR spectra were obtained on an AVANCE AV-300 nuclear
NMR spectra were obtained on an AVANCE AV-300 nuclear ma
acetone as solvent. Chemical shifts were calculated relative to TMS 
netic resonance spectrometer (Bruker, Switzerland) with deuterat
NMR control
Particle size analysis was carried out on a Nano-ZS ZEN3600 Zeta-
sizer (Malvern Instrument Co., UK). The polyol dispersions were diluted
with deionized water to a solids content of 0.2%  0.3%, and 1 mlL. of
the dispersion was placed in a cuvette
1550 GPC
2487
were
eze GPC softwar
was
ased to
of the ASTP
10 mg ml.
ples
tetrahydro
of diluted nano-StO, alcohol
for 12 h for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurement. The
dispersion was dripped on a C-coated Cu grid, and dried under vacuum
particle size and morphology of nano-SiO, were observed with a Tecnai
G2 20 S-TWIN transmission electron microscopy (FEI, USA)
ured with a c
goniometer (DSA 100, Kruss Ltd., Germany) at room temperature, 10 μL
films. The image was then captured using a telescope fitted with a video
camera. All the results were expressed as the average value of at least
micrograph
ere captured by
im
ning electron
opy (SEM) (Hitach S4300 N, Japan) at 15 kV. The
PC/PG thermogravimetric analyzer (Netzsch Co., Germany) at a
Ivermograv
heating rate of 10 °C min
600 °C.
The glass transition temperature was measured with differe
diferential scanning calorimeter (PerkinElmer Diamond, USA) at
*uu u oz jo mog seg ualonju pue _uju x oz jo aeu sueaq
 50 °C to 150 °C.
men was crumple-sealed in alu
3.Kesultsanddiscussioi
Nano SiO, particles were prepared by using TEOS as precursor by
jo aoejms aq uo sdnoug txoapq jo siof auam aiaq poa sagons
nano SiO prepared with TEOS. By a further reaction of hydrolytic
condensation between ethoxy groups of MTES or TMES and hydroxy1
groups of nano SiO, the hydrophobicity of nano SiO could be sig-
nificantly improved by replacing parts of hydroxyl groups on the sur-
face with methyl groups (Scheme 3). The water contact angle of the
hydrophobic nano SiO2 was larger than 150° and the drop of water
could roll freely on the surface of hydrophobic nano SiOz powder
(Fig. 2). Compared with modifying with MTES, the particles size of
tribution was narrow. MTES had three ethoxy groups, so the hydrolytic
nano SiO modified with TMES was homogeneous and the size dis-
condensation could take place on one SiOg nanoparticle surface or
between different SiO, nanoparticles, leading to a result of wide dis-
tribution of particle size. While TMES had only one ethoxy group, the
Fig. 2. Hydrophobic property od TafES modiried nano SiO:
Fig- 3, TEM image of TMES modified nano SiO;
nanoparticle surface, keeping a narrow distribution of particle size. The
TEM figure showed that the TMES modified SiOz nanoparticles were
spherical particles with uniform particle size distribution and a dia-
meter of about 100 nm (Fig, 3).
3.2. FT-IR cheracterisation of nano SiO;
FT-IR spectra of nano SiO and the hydrophobic modified nano SiO2
were shown in Fig. 4, respectively. The absorption peaks at 1050 and
the stretching vibration absorption of SiOSi. In the spectrum of
795 cm  appeared in both spectra of the two kinds of nano SiO, were
unmodified nano SiO, there was a small absorption peak at 948 cm1
which was attributed to the stretching vibration absorption of SiOH
[31]. This result indicated the existence of SiOH on the surface of
unmodified nano SiO> After the hydrophobic modification with TMES,
the stretching vibration absorption of SiOH became obviously weak
and new absorption peaks appeared at 2963 and 1259 cm, which
Fig. 5. TGA curves of nano SiO
were the stretching vibration absorption of
CH, These
dicated bydroxyl groups on the surface of nano SiO had been replaced
partly by methyl groups, and methyl groups had been grafted success
fully on the structure of the hydrophobic modified nano SiO The re-
plact
ement of SiOH by SiCH, made the nano SiO become hydro
phobic
3.3. Thermal stabiity of nano StO;
Fig. 5 showed the thermal gravimetric analysis of nano SiO before
and after hydrophobic modification. The thermal weight loss of the
unmodified nano SiO 0ccurred between 100 °C and 200°C was the
volatilization of the absorbed water on the surface of nano SiO. Be
cause the abundant hydroxyl groups on the surface of nano SiO could
absorb water. The stability of nano SiO, between 200 and 300 °C was
quite stable. When the temperature rose above 300 °C, there was ant-
other weight loss of nano SiOz, which was duo to the dehydration
the losing of hydration. After modified with TMES, the thermal weight
condensation reaction between the hydroxyl groups of nano SiOz and
loss of the hydrophobic modified nano SiO between 100 °C and 200 °C
became more obvious, due to the thermal decomposition of SiCH as
well as the volatilization of the absorbed water on the surface of the
200 °C, the thermal decomposition tendency of the hydrophobic mod-
hydrophobic modified nano SiO [32]. When the temperature was over
ified nano SiO was basically the same as that of the unmodified nano
SiO. Anyhow, the thermal stability of nano SiO, slightly decreased
after modified with TMES. At the temperature of 600 °C, the percentage
of residual weight of the unmodified nano SiO was 91%, while that of
the hydrophobic modified nano SiO was 88%, Although the thermal
stability of the modified nano SiO was slightly worse than that of the
unmodified nano SiOz, it could still meet the requirements for pre-
paration of super hydrophobic self-cleaning coatings.
3.4. Effect of nano SiO2 content on hydrophobic property of the
nanocomposite films
Hydrophobic films were prepared by incorporating different con-
siloxane-modified 2K-WPU films, respectively. The effects of nano SiO
tents of unmodifed nano SiO and TMES modified nano SiO into the
content on water contact angles of the hydrophobic films were shown in
Fig. 6. The results showed that the water contact angles of the films
increased with the increase of nano SiO content. When the nano SiO
content was small, SiO, nanoparticles totally encapsulated in the
polymer network, and could not effectively build a rough structure on
polymer surface. With the increase of nano SiO, content, SiO, nano-
particles gradually came up to the surface of the films, resulting to a
rough surface structure, which led to the increase of water contact
angle. The water contact angles of the films incorporated with un-
with TMES modified nano SiO at the same content level. The reason
modified nano SiOz were lower than those of the films incorporated
was that the unmodified nano SiO, had a large number of hydroxyl
groups on the surface, and the hydrophility of hydroxyl groups made
the unmodified nano SiO cannot result a significant increase of water
contact angle of the nanocomposite film. After modified with TMES, the
sturface of the nano SiO was covered with a large number of methy1
groups, which made the nano SiO more hydrophobic. When the con-
tent of TMES modified nano SiO reached 15%, the surface contact
angle of the film was higher than 150', and the water droplets could roll
freely on the surface of the films, achieving the property of super hy-
drophobicity (Fig. 7). Therefore, hydrophobic modified nano SiO was
more available for the preparation of super bydrophobic self-cleaning
surface.
Fig. 7. Photos of the nanocomposite films with different contents of TMES modified nano SiO2
films
the surface of the lotus state films, which build a micro/nanostructure
According to the lotus effect theoey, there are lots of protrusions on
on the surface. A certain amount of air is sealed in the pore when liquid
drops on a micro/nanostructure surface, which leads to a high water
contact angle and super hydrophobic property of the film [33]. In the
SiO, would aggregate and form micron size range aggregation, which
process of casting and curing of the nanocomposite films, parts of nano
was conducive to the construction of micro/nanostructure structure on
a surface. The effects of different TMES modified nano SiO, contents on
the surface structures of the nanocomposite films was observed with
SEM, and the results were shown in Fig. 8. The surface of the pure
siloxane-modified 2K-WPU films without adding SiO (Fig. 8a) was
quite smooth, showed good hydrophobicity with a water contact angle
mass of pure solid resin, the surface of the nanocomposite film became
of about 95’. When adding 5% TMES modified nano SiO, based on the
rough (Fig. Sb), and the water contact angle increased to 104'., Most
nano SiO was wrapped under the surface of the nanocomposite film
when the addition dosage of nano SiO was small. The surface rough-
ness increased slightly, resulting a little effect on water contact angle.
became rougher, with water contact angle of 130°and some granular
When the addition dosage of nano SiOz reached 10%, the film sturface
bulges on the surface (Fig. 8c). Increasing the addition dosage of nano
SiO to 15%, there were enough nano SiO which could not be com-
pletely wrapped under the surface of film and came up on the surface of
to bond the nano SiO particles together (Fig. 8d). The water contact
the film. At this condition, the 2k-WPU resin played a role as adhesive
angle of film came to 154', achieving the demand of super hydrophobic
surface. When the addition dosage of nano SiO reached 20%, the na-
nocomposite film surface was no longer a continuous whole and
cracked (Fig. Be) The cracking phenomenon was favorable for the in-
crease of water contact angle of the film, because the appearance of
small gaps on the surface of the film could help water droplets to
capture more air and the surface was more difficult to be wetted by
However, due to presence of to much nano SiO, the integrity of the
water droplets. The water contact angle of the film increased to 162",
nnocomposite film was destroyed, and the appearance and mechanical
properties of the film were affected. Therefore, the proper addition
dosage of nano SiO was 15%, under which a super bydrophobic sur-
films
DSC was used to evaluate the effect of TMES modified 1
SiO
(Fig. 9). When the addition dosage of nano SiO, increased from 0 to
20%, Ty of the films increased from 55 °C to 66°C. Most nano SiO was
wrapped in the polyurethane network and acted as another type of
inkedpoints
due
format
lopgjo
a. 0%; b. 5%; c. 10%; d. 15%; e. 20%
Fig. 9. DSC curves of nanc
modibied namo SiOz
Fig. 10, TGA and DTG curves of na
TMES modified nano SIOz
K-WPU
y
igid
Effect of nano SiOz content on thermal stability of the nano-
composite films was studied by TG (Fig. 10). The trends of thermal
degradation of nanocomposite films with different nano SiO contents
were similar to that of the neat 2K-WPU, and the rapid weight loss
stages all occurred above 250 °C. Changing TMES modified nano SiO
content from 0% to 20%, the 50% weight loss temperature of the films
increased from 327 °C to 338 °C. And the weight residues at 600 °C in-
creased with the increase of nano SiO, contents. Because of the good
thermal stability of nano SiO showed in Fig. 5, the thermal stability of
the nanocomposite films was enhanced by incorporating nano SiO
4. Conclusions
Hydrophobicity of nano SiO modified with TMES was significantly
improved by replacing parts of bydroxyl groups on the surface with
methyl groups. Super hydrophobic nanocomposite films were success
fully formed by incorporating hydrophobic modified nano SiO, into the
siloxane-modifed 2K-WPU, Due to the formation of rough micro/na-
nostructure built by nano SiO on the film surface, the water contact
angles of the nanocomposite films increased with the increase of hy-
interaction between the residual hydroxyl groups of nano SiO and the
drophobic modified nano SiO content. Due to the formation of strong
2K-WPU matrix, glass transition temperature of the nanoc
films shifted toward higher temperature with the increase
ofSiOz
content, and the thermal stability of the nan
hanced by incorporating nar
nposite hlms
0 SiOinto 2K-WPU matri
Acknowledgement
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Non-profit Research
Institution of Chinese Academy of Forestry (CAFYBB2017ZC005) and
the 948 Project of the State Forestry Administration of China (2015-4-
43J
References
