Influence of the solids content on the properties of waterborne polyurethane
dispersions obtained with polycarbonate of hexanediol
* UBE CHEMICAL EUROFE, SA. Zone ET Serraflo, 12100 Greo, Castellon, Spoin
ABSTRACT
1.lntroducthon
Waterborne polyurethane dispersions (PUDs) have an increas-
ing interest in adhesives and coatings industry due to environ-
mental, health and safety issues. Indeed, the development of
PUDs formulations is primarily motivated by the need of control-
ling the emission of volatile organic compound into the atmo-
sphere and also because of the superior properties of these
polymers when compared to the similar ones in organic
solvents [1].
PUDs are mainly used as flexible coatings for textiles, hard
coatings for wood and metallic surfaces,
and laminating industry. The structure of the PUD consists 
linear thermoplastic polyurethane chains dispersed in water due
to the presence of ionic groups in their structure (i.e. polyur
ethane
ionomer), which act as internal emulsifiers. Typically
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 96 5903977: fax: +34 96 5903454.
E-mail address: jm.martin?ua.es (J. Miguel Martin-Martinez).
0143-7496/$ - see front matter c 2011 Elsevier Utd. All rights reserved
doi:10.1016/jjjadhadh.2011.05.010
Waterborne polyurethane adhesives are an interesting alternative to tbe current solvent-borne
polyurethane adhesives used in the industry. Different aliphatic waterborne polyurethane dispersions
polycarbonate derived from hexanediol via the acetone method. The PUDs were charactersed by
(PUDs) with different solids content were synthesised by reacting isophorone disocyanate (IPDI) with a
Brookfield viscosity. pH, particle size, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and solids content
rheology, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermal gravimetry (TGA). Their adhesion was
measurement. The dry polyurethane films were characterised by ATR-IR spectroscopy. plateplate
evaluated from T-peel tests of flexible PVC/waterborme polyurethane dispersion/flexible PVC joints and
ium joints
The PUDs showed bimodal particle size distribution. The mean particle size of the PUDs decreased
by increasing their solids content but the particle sizedistribution of thePUDsincreasedby decreasi
their solids content. As the solids content increased the Brookfield viscosity of the PUDs increased due
to lower mean particle size where particle crowding was favoured, the PUD having 44 wt% solids
increase in the solids content increased the hard segments content and the degree of phase separation
content was an exception (higher particle size but lower polydispersity). On the other hand, the
transition temperature values and the lower the elasticmduli Adhesiv strength under peel stresses
sane qus easde aus a nq saueanod a  juu sps a q pae u aam
decreased by increasing the solid contents in the polyurethanes due to lower hard segments content
 NCO-tipped prepolymer ionomer is first prepared, which is read-
diamine, is added to react with the terminal NCo groups to
ily dissolved in acetone. Afterwards, a chain extender, such as a
increase the molecular weight. To make the resulting polyur-
ethane dispersible in water, the acetone is removed to obtain the
determined by the interactions between the hard and soft seg-
The properties
Recent studies [315| demonstrated that the ionic group content,
ments, and by the interactions between the ionic groups [2]
solids content, segmented structure, molecular weight of the
macroglycol, the type of chain extender and the hard/soft seg-
ments ratio, determined the PUDs properties. However, there
have been few studies dealing with the synthesis and character-
isation of polyurethanes based on polycarbonate diols [1622]
and, to the best of our knowledge, there are few publications
dealing specifically with polyurethane dispersions [11,23].
Polycarbo
diols
(PCD) have
actu
with:
-sisan sisfjosptq saaq suedu 'spofod yaasjod pue sasasod
tance, improved ageing and oil resistance, better mechanical
properties, better low temperature properties and increased
weathering and fungi resistance of the resulting polyurethanes
[11,24].
Polycarbonate diols are produced by reaction between an alkyl
diol and a dialky carbonate by using a catalyst [25.26] Because of
u fq pasuaeseg st aneu [eu sajeuogesjod au
polarity and a strong carbonate bond, it may be expected the
more noticeable degree of phase separation.
resulting polyurethanes will have good mechanical properties and
Little effort has been paid on the influence of the solids content
on the properties of waterborne polyurethane dispersions. To the
best of our knowledge, there are three studies only [23,27,28]
which have considered the synthesis and characterisation of
aqueous polyurethane dispersions derived from different polyols
having different solids content. Jung et al. [27] and Lee and Kim
[28] synthesised waterborne polyurethane dispersions using a
poly(tetramethylene glycol) with different solids content (from
s pasea azis aped a se ppnuo au (x s on o
the solids content of the polyurethane dispersions increased and
their viscosities were also affected by the solids content. How-
ever, the mechanical and dynamic mechanical properties of the
polyurethane films were not affected by the solids content.
Madbouly et al. [23] also studied the effect of the solids content
dispersions obtained from a polyester polyol and isophorone
(from 24 to 46 wt%) on the properties of aqueous polyurethane
dlisocyanate, They found that the viscosities of the dispersions
increased by increasing their solids content and the rheological
properties of the polyurethane films were also strongly influenced
by the solids content. On the other hand, they found that the
solids content of the polyurethane dispersions affected their
morphology as network structures, with a unique periodicity
and phase connectivity being obtained.
the contradictory results previously obtained, in this study
reported here, several aqueous polyurethane dispersions synthe
sised from polycarbonate derived from hexanediol, having differ-
ent solids content were prepared. The aim was to establish the
influence of the solids content on the structure-properties rela-
tionship in polyurethane adhesives, including their adhesion
properties. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
contribution in the existing literature that analyse the influence
of the solids content on the properties of polyurethane disper-
sions obtained with polycarbonate diol.
2.Expermenta
2.1. Materials
The aqueous polyurethane dispersions were
preparedby
macroglycol, an internal emulsifier and a chain extender. Poly-
carbonate of hexanediol (M1011 Da) (supplied by
Chemical Europe, Castellon, Spain) was used as the macroglycol,
UBE
and it was dried at 80 °C and 5 Torr for 3 h before use.
The disocyanate used was isophorone disocyanate [IPDI, 98%
Barcelona, Spain), which is liquid at room temperature. Diethyle-
purity) (mixture  of cis/trans
isomers) (supplied by _Aldrich,
neglycol (DEG, 99% purity) and dimethylolpropionic acid (DMPA,
98% purity) (both supplied by Aldrich, Barcelona, Spain) were used
further purification. Triethylamine (TEA, 99% purity) was used as
as the short diol and internal emulsifier, respectively, without
the neutralization agent, and monohydrated hydrazine (HZ, 99%
purity) (both supplied by Fluka, Madrid, Spain) was used as the
Sussn paredard asam suorssadsip aueqiaunfjod snoonbe snog
an NCO/OH ratio of 1.5. The solids content of the dispersions was
0.5 wt% and that of DMPA was set to 5 wt% (both with respect to
varied between 37 and 44 wt%. The DEG content was set to
The macroglycol, IPDI, DEG and DMPA were added to a glass
jacketed reactor equipped with a mechanical stirrer to obtain a
prepolymer. The reaction was carried out at 80 °C under nitrogen
atmosphere. When the amount of residual NCO groups reached
the desired value (obtained by n-dibutylamine titration), the
prepolymer was dissolved in acetone at 4555 °C by continuous
stirring at 450 rpm until complete dissolution. This solution was
then dispersed into a triethylamine (TEA) aqueous solution to
neutralise the carboxylic acids moieties in the DMPA.
Afterwards, the chain extende (hydrazine) was added to avoid
because of the preferential reactivity of the NCo groups with
the reaction between the unreacted NCO groups and the water,
amines. The polymer was dispersed in water at 900 rpm and the
residlual acetone was removed in a Rota Vapour unit at 50 °C and
300 mbar for 1 h.
2.3. Preparation of the polyurethane film
Some properties of the polyurethanes were measured using
solid films, which were prepared by placing about 100 cm? of
polyurethane dispersion in a Teflon mould and allowing a slow
evaporation of the solvent at room temperature for 72 h. After-
wards, the polyurethane was dried at 40 °C for 8 h to allow the
complete removal of water. Films obtained were about from
0.7 to 0.9 mm thick.
olids
24.Experimentartechnique?
2.4.1. Characterisotion of the waterborne polyurethane dispersions
eous dispersion was placed in a beaker. The pH values of the
polyurethane aqueous dispersions were measured at 20 °C in a
pHmeter using a silver reference electrode model Hl 8418
(Oakton Instruments, Vernon Hils, USA). The pH was calculated
as the average of three experimental determinations.
Porticle size distribution. The mean particle size and the particle
size distribution of the polyurethane dispersions were measured
in a Coulter IS230 system (Beckman Coulter Inc., Miami, FL, USA).
provided with laser diffraction and polarised light detectors. A
small amount of aqueous polyurethane dispersion was added into
the deionised water tank. The statistical model used to obtain
the particle size distribution assumes that the particles are
polystyrene
nt the 
the
mean particle size wa:
verage of thr
experin
PUDs(aqueous
polyurethane dispersions) were measured in a Brookfield visc-
ometer LVDV-I-Prime  (Brookfield Engineering Laboratories,
Stoughton, Massachusetts, USA). About 50 ml waterborme poly-
urethane dispersion was placed in a beaker and the measure-
no. 61. The Brookfield viscosity was calculated as the average of
ments were carried out at 20 °C and 100 rpm using the spindle
three experimental determinations.
Solids content. The solids content of the PUDs were obtained by
dlifference in weight before and after solvent evaporation. About
 1 g polyurethane aqueous dispersion was placed on an aluminium
container and the solvent was evaporated at 105 °C for different
time in an oven until constant weight was reached. The solids
content was calculated as the average of three experimental
determinations.
Trarasmission
2electron microscopy (TEM). A Jeol TEM-2010
(Tokyo, Japan) instrument was used to analyse the size and the
extent of particles interaction in the polyurethane dispersions;
an acceleration voltage of 100 kV was used. To obtain the TEM
micrographs of the PUDs, they were diluted in water
solutions placed directly on a copper grid for analysis.
and the
of the dried polyurethane films were obtained in Bruker Tensor 27
spectrometer (Bruker Optik GMbH, Ettlingen, Germany), provided
with Fourier transform analysis (FTIR). Measurements were
carried out in the attenuated total reflectance mode using a ZnSe
prism. An incidence angle of the IR radiation of 45° was used, and
100 scans were averaged with a resolution of 4 cm 1
Diferentiel scanning calorimetry (DSC) DSC experiments
ments, New Castle, Delaware, USA), Aluminium pans containing
were carried out in TA DSC Q100 V6.2. instrument (TA Instru-
1015 mg of sample were heated from 70 to 110°C under a
nitrogen atmosphere (flow rate: 50 ml/min). The heating rate
the thermal history of the samples. From the second heating run,
was 10 °C/min. The first heating run was carried out to remove
the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polyurethanes was
obtained.
TGSD TA thermal balance, model 851e/1600/LF (TA Instruments,
Thermel grrvimetry (TGA). TGA studies were carried out in
New Castle, Delaware, USA). Samples (from 10 to 15 mg) were
heated under nitrogen (flow rate: 100 ml/min) from room tem-
Heidelberg, Germany) was used to analyse the particle size of the
cope (Leica,
PUDs. The PUD was placed on glass microscope slide (dimensions
of 76 × 26 mm²) and then covered by a small glass cover slide. On
the other hand, the segmented structure of the polyurethane films
was also analysed by confocal laser microscopy. The polyurethane
films were obtained by placing the dispersion on glass microscope
slide (dimensions of 76 × 26 mm°) and then covered by a small
glass cover slide, The sample was dried at room temperature for
72 h followed by heating at 40 °C for 8 h to allow the complete
removal of water before analysis.
ethane films were determined in a shear stress-controlled Bohlin
CS50 rheometer (Optilas Iberica S.A, Madrid, Spain) using parallel
0.4 mm. Experiments were performed in the linear viscoelastic
plates (upper plate diameter=20 mm): the gap selected was
region by melting the polyurethane film at 180 °C and cooling
down to 40 °C at a cooling rate of 5 °C/min
2.4.3. Adhesion propertie:
T-peel strergth meast
from T-peel tests of solvent-wiped plasticized PVC/polyurethane
adhesive/ plasticized PVC joints., The PVC test samples used had
dlimensions of 30 × 150 × 5 mm? and they were supplied by Cel-
tecnia (Monovar, Spain). Before applying the PUD, the PVC surface
was methyl ethyl ketone wiped for plasticizer removal from the
JAd qpea on qsuq Aq paldde sem uonos and 8 060 snoqe uau
e uado yapun uu o oj ajeodena oi uanjos a Susoe aoens
strip to be joined. After water evaporation (it took about 90 min)
infrared radiation (reactivation process) The PVC strips were
the adhesive film was heated suddenly at S0 °C for 10 s under
ssaad aed onepfq u paoed pue peu u nd Apepa
where a pressure of 0.8 MPa was applied for 10 s to achieve a
formation in an Instron 4411 universal testing machine (Instron
suitable joint. The T-peel strength was measured 72 h after joint
Limited, Barcelona, Spain) using a cross-head speed of 100 mm/
min. The values obtained were the average of three replicates.
of the waterborme polyurethane dispersions was evaluated from
Single Iap-sheer test. The adhesive strength (under shear stress)
single lap-shear tests of aluminium/waterborme polyurethane
dlimensions of 30 × 150 × 1.7 mm? were used. Before applying the
dispersion/aluminium joints. Aluminium 5754 test samples of
PUD, the aluminium surface was methyl ethyl ketone wiped to
removal of grease and other surface contamination, allowing the
solvent to evaporate for 30 min under open air. Then, about 0.30 g
jo eaue ue uo ejngeds e jo sueau Aq pasdde sem uognjos and
30 × 30 mm² of one of the aluminium pieces to be joined. The
aluminium strips were immediately placed in contact and a static
weight of 700 g was applied for 72 h to achieve a suitable joint.
The shear strength was measured 72 h after joint formation in
Instron 8516 universal testing machine (Instron Buckingham-
shire, England) using a cross-head speed of 10.2 m/min. The
values obtained were the average of three replicates.
3. Results and discussion
Some properties of the aqueous polyurethane dispersions are
PUDs were similar to the theoretical ones and ranged between 37
given in Table 1. The experimental solids content values of the
around 8.3 (Table 1), which were within the usual range of the
and 44 wt%, The aqueous polyurethane dispersions had pH values
polyurethane dispersions [4,11].
The Brookfield viscosity values of the PUDs were strongly
influenced by their solids content, in agreement with previous
results [23,27,28]. Thus the PUDs containing 37 and 39 wt% solids
content had similar Brookfield viscosity values whereas the
viscosity was higher for the PUD with 42 wt% solids content,
decreasing drastically for the PUD having 44 wt% solids content.
This trend can be related to the differences in the particle size
distributions of the PUDs. Fig. 1 showed the particle size distribu-
tions of the aqueous polyurethane dispersions having different
solids content. All dispersions showed bimodal particle size
distribution, except PU37, which was trimodal. All PUDs showed
mean particle size in the ranges of 325360 and 12002000 nm.
In general, the mean particle size of the PUDs decreased by
increasing their solids content (PU44 is an exception). This trend
was in agreement with the variation in Brookfield viscosity values
for the PUDs, i.e. the higher is the mean particle size, the lower is
the PUDs decreased by increasing their solids content. Therefore,
the viscosity of the PUD. On the other hand, the polydispersity of
the solids content determined the structure and particle size of
Fig. 1, Particle sze distnbutions ot the waterborne polyurethane disperssons having ditlerent solids content
the PUDs. This effect was likely to be due to the kinetics of
formation of polyurethane chains during the PUD synthesis, as
the higher solids content implied higher number of particles and
therefore their particle size could be smaller. The higher number
of particles will decrease their mobility and consequently the
probability of creating particle-particle interactions should be
lower [23]. However, the PUD containing 44 wt% solids content
was an exception likely due to the existence of almost mono-
modal particle size distribution with mean particle size of
1750 nm, i.e. during the synthesis the most of the particles had
larger particle size than in the other PUDs.
The trends in the Brookfield viscosity and particle size of the
dispersions were also confirmed by TEM micrographs of the PUDs.
Fig. 2 showed that the TEM micrographs of the waterborne
showed an heterogeneous particle size and the particle crowding
were favored (observed as black aggregates). However, the
increase in the solids content to 42 wt%, produced a more
homogeneous and lower mean particle size waterborne polyur-
ethane dispersion. The PUD with 44 wt% solids content had a
higher mean particle size than the other PUDs.
The molecular structures of the polyurethane films were
Fig. 2, TEM micrographs of the waterborne polyurethane dispersions having
different solids content.
Fig, 3. 18501575 cm region of the ATR-IR spectra of the polyurethanes havin
difterent solids content.
characteristic IR bands found in the polyurethanes was given in
Table 2 [5]. The urethane, urea and carbonate groups in these
types of polyurethanes were able to form hydrogen bonds. The
dlonors, while the acceptors can be oxygen atoms of the CO
NH groups in the urethane and urea groups acted as proton
groups in the urethane or the polycarbonate groups. The most
relevant IR bands in the polyurethanes correspondled to hydrogen
and  NH stretching of the urea groups at 1532 cm~1, CH
Supans N  uo giEE on gEEe won) Suians HN papuoq
stretching of the hydrocarbon chains at 2940 and 2855 cm1
and CO stretching due to urea (17001648 cm 2) and urethane
(from 1740 to 1700 cm1) groups. On the other hand, the ATR-IR
spectra showed the characteristic NCOO stretching (1034 cm)
corresponding to urethane and COC stretching bands of the
macroglycol (1240, 1162 and 955 cm  ). The ATR-IR spectra of the
polyurethanes with different solids content were quite similar,
although some differences were found to exist in the relative
intensities of several bands. The ATR-IR spectra of the polyur-
ethanes in the 18501575 cm 1 region were given in Fig, 3. The
relative intensity of the C=O groups was fixed in all polyur-
ethanes, to better show the differences in their structures. The
increase in the solids content slightly increased the intensity of the
-mAjod au jo  uo si1 1e pueq Suupsans sueuaun papuoq
bandls at 16991648 cm1 also increased with respect to that of
ethanes and the intensity of the urea (free and bonded) stretching
the free urethane stretching band at 1740 cm because of the
On the other hand, the increase in the solids content in
increase in the hard segment content in the polyurethanes [15]
the polyurethanes also increased the relative intensities of the
Fig4.DlGAtheimograms ofthepolyuretmanes havg diheteit solksconten
NCOO stretching band at 1034 cm  of the urethane group and
the CN stretching and NH bending at 1532 cm 1 of the urea
group, because of the increase in the hard segment content
[ie. the urethane and urea groups).
stability of the polyurethanes but also on their structure, as the
TGA analysis gave information, not only of the thermal
lifferentiated degradation steps of the hard and soft segments
can be obtained. Fig. 4 showed the derivative of the TGA curves of
the polyurethanes. According to Fig. 4 the polyurethanes were
thermally stable up to about 400 °C and the thermal stability was
increased by increasing their solids content. However, the degra-
dlation mechanism was very complex due to the different stability
of the hard and soft segments. At around 40 °C, the removal of
small amounts of residual solvent likely acetone) was produced.
exa e jo ssae s . o re uoepap a
based polycarbonate. Because diol and diamine were used in the
synthesis of the polyurethanes, two kind of hard segments were
formed, i.e. urethane and urea types, It was known that the hard
segments were more prone to thermal decomposition than
the soft segments in the polyurethanes [27]. The degradation
of the urea and urethane hard segments could be distinguished in
the TGA thermograms at 303323 °C and the decomposition of
the soft segments was resulted at about 340349 °C. Finally. an
additional small degradation at 420 °C, likely due to some
residual soft segments, was obtained.
dlifferent degradations
polyurethanes obtained from the
Main decompositions in the TGA thermograms of the polyurethanes having
differentsoudscontemr
Fig. 5. (a) DSC thee
TGA thermograms. Because the TGA thermogram of the poly-
carbonate of hexanodiol showed two main degradations at 280
pue oszoz ne saueqaunAjod aqjo suogepex8ap au '. o9e pue
340349 °C should correspond to the soft segments. The weight
polyurethanes (more than 61 wt%) indicating their thermoplastic
loss corresponding to the soft segments was dominant in the
nature and it decreased by increasing the solids content. There-
fore, the hard segments content in the polyurethanes increased by
increasing the solids content. The weight loss due to the polyol
component was less relevant, contributing less than 5 wt%.
The influence of the solids content on the thermal properties of
the polyurethanes
was also studied by differential scan
showed two glass transition temperatures due to the soft seg
ments and one melting peak at 125143 °C. Fig. 5b sho
enlarged region between 25 and 10 °C corresponding to the two
glass transition temperatures of the polyurethane with 37 wt%
solids content. The two glass transition temperatures may corre-
spond to the hydrocarbon chains in the soft segments (Tg) and to
the hydrocarbons chains near the carbonate moieties in the soft
segments (Tgz). Both the Tg and T,2 values decreased as the solids
content in the polyurethane increased, indicating higher degree of
phase separation in the polyurethanes (Fig. 5c). On the other
hand, the melting temperature increased as the solids content
increased (Table 4). During the DSC heating run, the crystal-
lisation either the melting of the soft segments were produced,
indicating that the crystallisation kinetics is very slow.
The morphology of the polyurethanes was e
confocal microscopy. Because of the different molecular weights of
exanmined bylaset
the hard and soft segments in the polyurethanes, the differences in
brightness in the confocal micrographs may allow these to be
distinguished and therefore obtain information on the degree of
phase separation. The formation of these two-phase domains
structures has been described elsewhere [29] to spinodal decom-
position of the polymeric chains in the polyurethane. The confocal
micrographs of the polyurethanes showed dark or bright regions
corresponding to the soft and hard segment domains, respectively.
As a typical example, Fig. 6 showed the confocal micrographs of
the polyurethanes having 39 and 44 wt%, The confocal microscopy
of the polyurethanes with lower solids content (37 and 39 wt%)
largely showed almost only bright (hard segment domains) region,
whereas the confocal micrographs of the polyurethanes with 42 or
44 wt% solids content showed both bright and dark regions.
Therefore, the soft segments content in the polyurethanes
increased by increasing their solids contents, and on the other
hand, the higher the solids content in the polyurethanes, the
higher the degree of phase separation that resulted.
The viscoelastic properties of the polyurethanes were obtained
by plateplate rheology. Fig. 7a showed as typical example the
variation of the storage (G) and the loss (C°) modulus as a function
of the temperature for the polyurethane with 37 wt% solids content.
The moduli of the polyurethane decreased as the temperature
increased, and a cross-over between the storage and loss moduli
was prodluced. At temperatures lower than that of the cross-over, a
polyurethane was mainly elastic, and at temperature higher than
Melting temperature and enthalpy values obtained firom the DSC curves of the
Fig. 6, Confocal laser micrographs of the polyurethanes having 39 and 44 wt3
Fig, 7. (a) Variation of the s)
ature for the poly
less (G°)
. (b) Variat
the
and loss
that of the cross-over, the viscous regime was dominant [5]. The
similar temperature as the solids content increased (Table 5) due to
cross-over in the polyurethanes shifted toward lower modulus but
the increase in the soft segment content. Fig. 7b showed the
variation of the storage modulus (C) of the polyurethanes as a
function of their solids content. An increase in the solids content
produced a decrease in storage modulus (CG), dlue to a higher dlegree
of phase separation in the polyurethanes,
3.3. Adhesion properties
Finally, the
with
lifferent sol
rith the
gaad
stresses
been
obtained
sion t
T-peel
tests
peel
poly
: CA
PVC/waterborne polyurethane dispersion/plasticized PVC joints
According to Fig. 8, the increase in the solids content appeared not
to affect the adhesive strength of the polyurethane joints., The locus
sions umder shear stresses was evaluated from single lap-shear
The adhesive strength of the waterbome polyurethane disper-
tests
of aluminium/waterborne polyurethane dispersion/alumi-
nium joints The shear strength values were high and Fig. 9 showed
a decrease in the lap-shear strength with increasing solids content
of the polyurethane, the maximum value was obtained in the joint
produced with a polyurethane having 37 wt% solids content. As a
cohesive failure in the adhesive was always obtained, the trend in
the shear strength values can be related to the polyurethanes
properties. Thus the increase in solids content reduced the hard
against shear might be expected to be lower too.
segment content in the polyurethanes and therefore the resistance
4.Conclusion
An increase in the solids content (or the increase in the soft
segment content) in the polyurethanes 
produced a decrease in
particle size distribution and particles polydispersity of the
polyurethane dispersions. On the other hand, as the solids content
increased, the Brookfield viscosity of the PUDs increased thereby
decreasing the mobility of the particles and consequently
dlecreasing the probability of particle-particle interactions.
The solids 
ced the
differ
structure of the polyurethar
segm
nes to be distinguished. The increase ir
the solids content increa
nding to the
adation of the soft s
glass transition temperatures indlicating higher degree of phase
The increase in the solids content decreased the values of the
separation in the polyurethanes. On the other hand, the cross-
over between the storage and loss mocdulus shifted toward lower
adhesive strength under peel stresses., However, a decrease in the
Finally, the increase in the solids content did not affect the
shear strength and a cohesive failure in the polyurethane were
hard segments content.
Acknowledgements
1区
acknowledged.
m.colera@ube.es)
References
[z
