MartinMelchiors*,MichaelSonntag,Claus Kobusch,EberhardJurgens
Abstract
substantially to this. Addi
We expect that
upported our developmenb
feel;FilmIoenation:Blisters
1.Introduction
1.1. Potyurethanes
he
coatings
applic
ns for thi
q A e pi sueo auenod e st sg au
-[os o aouesisau Supuesino susquoo ou ienb jo qanal
vents and chemicals with good weather stability. It is possi-
ble to formulate both clearcoats and — because of their good
 sodo pid  saod Sum d
yield high-gloss, high-bodied films with excellent flow prop-
erties. The films have outstanding mechanical properties and
provide the ideal balance of hardness and flexibility, even at
low temperatures. Good scratch resistance is also a feature
of polyurethane coatings.
This high level of quality results from the primary and
secondary structures of the polyurethane chains [1]. The
polymer chains are protected against solvents, acids, bases
and other chemicals by the urethane
ips which are resis-
E-naifaieu:martin.metchiors.mm@bayer-ag.de(MMelchiors)
www.elsevier.com/locate/porgcoat
Recent developments in aqueous two-component
polyurethane (2K-PUR) coatings
Bayer AG Coarings, Colorants anad Special Raw Materials, D-57368 Lzverkausen, Giernmaw
 ooouoan soqanem po sanea oA og oq tm sueoo suean.kpod guauodosom ouoquaagos jo saadod g poo o
cently, waterborne two-component polyurethane coatings have matured to the point that they offer realistic altermatives to the corresponding
solventborne systems in various application fields
For industrial finishing and
ow VOC level. We de
a Aq pue — sisfjoup<u o1 Kiepoadso — sjeoquaqo on nue1
high density of hydrogen bridge bonds which form a sta-
ble physical network. The hydrogen bridge bonds and the
block-like structure of the polyurethane chains in hard and
soft segments, which can combine and arrange themselves
in microdomains, ensure the outstanding mechanical prop-
erties of the paint film [1].
The second reason is the high variability of the property
profile of polyurethane coatings. The coating system can be
tailored for a specific application by varying, e.g. the chemi-
cal structure of the soft segments (e.g. polyether, polyester of
polycarbonate), the distribution and length of the hard seg-
ments (i.e. the density of the physical network yielded by the
hydrogen bridge bonds and other interactions) or the molec-
ular weight and degree of branching of the chains. The hard
segments govem, e.g. the hardness, strength and toughness
of the paint film. The soft segments determine the flexibility,
low-temperature flexibility and glass transition temperature
Tg. Polyurethane chemistry also permits the incorporation
of additional building blocks and functional groups which
dispersibility in water or cross-linking.
can be used to tailor properties such as the feel of the film,
with the aid of a cross-linking agent. In the c
case of systems
shapq reuongxopiq ue Suu-ssoo  Sunbas
are combined with either blocked polyisocyanate hardeners
to yield stoving one-component systems or with polyiso-
cyanate hardeners containing free NCO groups to formulate
two-component polyurethane (2K-PUR) systems.
Such solventb
cessfully for many years in a
apA
:variety of applications
o anoa suoeondde u! Ie aoqe pasn ae Aou [t]
resistance properties, e.g. in automotive OEM, automotive
refinish, aircraft finishing, industrial coatings and corrosion
protection.
Whereas in the past, maximum performance and appear-
ance were the main market requirements, which resulted in
the development of solventborne 2K-PUR systems, it is coat-
ings with reduced emissions which are now increasingly in
demand. This is the result of, on the one hand, more strin-
gent legislation restricting emissions and residues and, on
the other hand, the increasing environmental awareness of
end users. The coatings industry and, correspondingly, the
manufacturers of coating raw materials have been forced
to increase their efforts in developing suitable products and
technologies to market maturity.
There are a number of options for producing low VOC
coatings. Waterbome polyurethane coatings have alreaidy
taken a significant share of the market and stilloffer so much
potential for further development that their future prospects
are very promising. Modern waterborne products must (at
least match the property profle yielded by solventbome sys-
tems. It must be accepted that the balance of strengths and
weaknesses of anew technology may differ from that of con-
ventional systems. There are also often new things to learn
with respect to manufacturing, plant and application tech-
nologies. However, it is the bottom line which is important.
The logical consequence of what has been said so far is
to combine waterborne coating technology with the charac-
teristics and structural principles of 2K-PUR systems [5,6].
However, up until the late 1980s, it was still unthinkable to
produce waterborne two-component polyurethane coatings.
The main and seemingly insurmountable obstacle was the
undesired secondary reaction of the water with the hardener.
The secret of the growing success of waterborne 2K-PUR
technology [711] lies in the development of raw ma-
terials, e.g. in the development of a new generation of
water-reducible polyisocyanate hardeners, in the develop-
ment of improved binder dispersions based on polyacrylates
and polyesterpolyurethanes, by improvements in applica-
tion technology and by deeper understanding of the under-
lying reactions and behavior of aqueous two-component
polyurethane systems during their pot life, application and
film formation.
1.2. Polyols
In contrast to the solventbome 2K-PUR systems, the
polyol in an aqueous system has the additional function of
effect the good dispersibility of the relatively hydrophobic
polyisocyanate in the aqueous binder dispersion with the
minimum of shear energy. The particle size of the resulting
dispersion should be as fine as possible to ensure film prop-
 -sso o sn q se ns s
[12].
The development of the particle size distribution of a
-xopsq  go Sunsistoo wuasAs d- snoonbe qegd1
functional binder dispersion and a hydrophilically modified
polyisocyanate can be analyzed during the pot life. Dur-
ing mixing of the polyisocyanate and polyol components,
the hydrophobic polyisocyanate phase is first broken down
into small droplets by the shear energy applied. However,
this is not sufficient to produce a stable dispersion. The
binder molecules equipped with a sufficient amount of hy-
drophilic groups now occupy the hydrophobic surfaces of
the polyisocyanate droplets and thus keep them in a stable
state in the aqueous phase. This barrier around the reac-
tive polyisocyanate also prevents the NCO/water reaction
from dominating during the pot life. In addition, some of
sdop popod o o se sseud aeoosod a
which triggers the cross-linking reaction, similar to conven-
tional 2K-PUR systems.
Which
polyols
particularly
suitable for
2K-PUR
systems? In principle
ndary dispersions
can be
Ised [1315]
In primary dispersions, chain
formation
1of thebinder
molecules takes place in the aqueous phase so that no ad-
ditional dispersion step is required. Polyacrylic dispersions
suogondde u Ie aoqe pasn ame ou uorsadsip jo ad1
requiring fast drying under mild conditions, e.g. in indus-
trial wood and furmiture coating. The high molecular weight
and glass transition temperature give these dispersions rapid
physical drying properties at room temperature before the
onset of chemical cross-linking. The disadvantage of these
dispersions is the poorer dispersibility of the polyisocyanate
hardener. In order to achieve an acceptable film appear-
ance, it is necessary either to use highly hydrophilic polyiso-
cyanate hardeners or to apply high shear forces in mixing.
Even then, it is still difficult to prod
duce high-gloss films.
the organic phase. This organic resin melt or resin solution
is then dispersed in water. Various types of secondary dis-
persion with different basic chemical structures can be used
in aqueous 2K-PUR systems.
Compared with primary polyacrylic dispersions, sec-
ondary polyacrylic dispersions have a much lower molecu-
o ap sau ensn e uoesd ug pue nm re
OH functionality. The characteristic properties of aqueous
2K-PUR coatings based on secondary polyacrylic disper-
sions include, above all, good resistance to solvents and
chemicals — the resistance to hydrolysis is of particular
note — and good weather stability. Compared with primary
polyacrylic dispersions, they also have clear advantages
in terms of their flow properties and gloss. However, they
dry more slowly. Drying occurs primarily via the chemical
cross-linking reaction of the OH groups with the isocyanate
groups of the hardener, whereas physical drying plays only
a subordinate role.
Aqueous 2K-PUR coatings based on polyester disper-
sions generally yield films with good gloss and flow prop-
erties. These dispersions can also be used to formulate
high-gloss pigmented coatings. The downside is their often
poor resistance properties. In particular, the vulnerability
of the polyester bonds to hydrolysis is important as this
may result in the cleavage of the backbone of the binder
molecule.
In the case of polyester-polyacrylic hybrid dispersions
this susceptibility to hydrolysis is reduced by grafting of
relatively hydrophobic polyacrylate chains. These binders
yield aqueous 2K-PUR coatings with good film properties.
A particular advantage of the polyesterpolyacrylic disper-
sions is that, e.g. soft polyester chains can be combined with
hard polyacrylate chains to yield a balance of hardness and
flexibility. This type of property profile is highly favorable
in, e.g. plastics coating.
A further class of high-performance binders are the
polyester-polyurethane dispersions. These are relatively
low molecular weight polyurethane dispersions which con-
tain polyester blocks. They have a property profile which
combines the good film appearance of polyester dispersions
with the good mechanical properties of polyurethanes, e.g.
the combination of flexibility and hardness or good scratch
have better resistance properties and good pigment wetting,
resistance. Compared with pure polyester dispersions, they
The property profile can be tailored, e.g. via the density of
urethane groups.
hydrophili
sity
poly1
s [15]
The choice of isocyanate monomer unit is a key factor
in the film properties. If the aim is to formulate lightstable
coatings with good film appearance and a reasonable bal-
ance of pot life and drying properties, the hardeners are
usually based on the aliphatic disocyanates HDI and IPDI.
Used as the monomer unit for polyisocyanate hardeners,
HDI results in flexible films with good scratch resistance
because of its long methylene chains. The low viscosity of
HDI-based hardeners and the ease of mixing into aqueous
binder dispersions make it possible to obtain high-gloss
films with good fow properties. In contrast, IPDI-based
hardeners result in faster drying, harder coatings because
of their cycloaliphatic structure. The films usually display
outstanding chemical resistance and very good resistance to
abrasion. As a result of the higher viscosity of IPDI-based
-anbe u asiadsp o 1noyp auou are oq seuesosfjod
ous 2K-PUR systems than HDI-based hardeners. This can
have an effect on the gloss and flow properties of the
coatings.
Diisocyanates are characterized by relatively high vapor
a ane ‘soodse Kiages peuoednoo te tosg pue anssand
fore unsuitable in monomeric form for use in the formulation
of polyurethane coatings. They also exhibit a functionality
of only two whereas hardeners with a higher functionality
xomau aueanfpod Auenb-qgtu e aonpord on paunbau are
Suitable modification reactions are therefore employed to
transform them into physiologically safe polyisocyanates of
higher molecular weight.
The dimer and trimer forms of diisocyanates are the most
suitable for use in coating applications. Cyclic trimers with
their stable six-membered ring and high functionality yield
coatings with the best performance. The advantage of cyclic
dimers and allophanates is their low viscosity combined
with better dispersibility in aqueous 2K-PUR systems.
Biuret-based polyisocyanates have higher viscosities than
cyclic trimers, which makes it more difficult to produce fine
dispersions in aqueous binders.
To improve the dispersibility in water of the polyiso-
cyanate hardeners, they can be modified by the addition of
hydrophilic groups. Suitable hydrophilic components are
ionic or nonionic groups or combinations of the two. These
act as internal emulsifiers which are characterized by their
high level of effectiveness and very good compatibility with
the polyisocyanate. Provided the hydrophilic modification
of the polyisocyanates is adequate, fine dispersions can be
produced by stirring the hardeners into the polyol disper-
sion by hand. Polyisocyanates with nonionic hydrophilic
modification are produced by, e.g. reacting monohydroxy-
functional hydrophilic polyethers with some of the NCO
groups of the polyisocyanate. The disadvantages compared
with the nonmodified hydrophobic polyisocyanates
the reduction in NCO functionality and the increased hy-
an
drophilicity of the system which can, e.g. reduce the water
resistance of the paint film. To overcome these drawbacks
we developed a new generation of hydrophilically modi-
fied polyisocyanates characterized by a reduced content of
Using these second-generation water dispersible polyiso-
cyanate hardeners, which can easily be emulsified in water,
the quality level of waterbome 2K-PUR coatings can be in-
creased distinctly. Improved resistance to water, chemicals
and solvents is a consequence of the reduced hydrophilic-
ity and of the increased network density due to the higher
functionality. Additionally the appearance of the film can
even be improved as a result of the easy dispersibility of the
polyisocyanate.
If nonmodified polyisocyanates are used, the main fac-
tor in ensuring the good dispersibility of the hardener in the
binder is a low viscosity. Only then can the polyisocyanate
phase be broken down into fine droplets in the aqueous dis-
persion. In the case of higher-viscosity polyisocyanates, the
droplets remain relatively large. The dispersion is unstable
and the polyisocyanate settles
        s
in dispersing the polyisocyanate in the binder. A special
application technology is required and represents a rational
solution in some fields of application, especially on-line
application. For example, jet dispersion technology makes
it possible to produce fine dispersions in suitable binders
of the hydrophobic polyisocyanates used in conventional
high-performance 2K-PUR systems. This allows the formu-
lation of aqueous 2K-PUR coatings which satisfy the most
stringent film appearance requirements for on-line automo-
tive finishing. In other fields, it is not yet possible to use
such mixing and application technologies.
Within certain limits, the dispersion of the polyisocyanate
can also be improved by thinning the hardener with organic
M.Mfeichwors eT a./Progressn0rgomxCormgs 40(Z0) 99f0
Fig.I.lmprovementsmwatctdispersiblepolyisocyanat
in the VOC value of the coating system.
high-
quality
solventborne 2K-PUR coating
sed
Bayer is work-
ing to develop raw materials for use in automotive finishing.
industrial metal coating and wood finishing. We perceive
great potential in clearcoats and topcoats for OEM automo-
tive coatings. We developed waterborne 2K-PUR coatings
for automotive refinishing and commercial vehicle finishing
too. In the case of plastics coating, aqueous 2K-PUR systems
represent an altermative to conventional systems because of
their outstanding mechanical properties. Remarkable suc-
cess has been achieved with special-effect coatings based on
aqueous 2K-PUR systems. The best soft-feel effect, e.g. for
ss d- snnbe Susn puqo q ueo sio ms
tems. Development work has also yielded aqueous systems
for the industrial finishing of metal, wood and furniture.
These coatings match the property profile of solvent-based
2K-PUR systems yet have a much lower solvent content.
Interesting potential exists for aqueous 2K-PUR coatings in
other application areas such as floor coatings and corrosion
protection.
Two examples of applications will show what we have
d- snoanbe Susn sanba asa a o aop
systems which represent a promising alternative to conven-
tional 2K-PUR systems
Solventborme two-component polyurethane coatings also
dominate the automotive refinish sector because of their ex-
cellent property profile. In Europe, they have a market share
60% and rising.
of 78%. Their current share of the world market is around
-doud jueodu isou aq ane aouereadde wg pue Su1
erties for automotive refinish clearcoats and topcoats. The
coatings are dried at 60°C. Very high requirements are made
on the film appearance. It should be posible to achieve
a Suxju u sanog eous peuuu Suidde usug e qons
binder and the hardener. Therefore, hydrophobic polyiso-
cyanates are less suitable, because hazing and poor finish
reproducibility are to be expected. Of course, automotive
clearcoats and topcoats are required to display maximum re-
sistance properties to water, solvents and chemicals as well
as very good weather stability.
2K-PUR coatings. However, as in other sectors, there is
growing interest to have low VOC coating systems in
the automotive refinish market [7]. Even if legislation is
that regulations will prescribe more stringent guideliries
still somewhat hesitant in this respect, it can be expected
in the near future. The two routes taken in reducing the
solvent content of 2K-PUR coatings are the development
of high-solids/ultra-high-solids systemsand of aqueous
2K-PUR systems [12].
Aqueous 2K-PUR systems can easily undercut existing
VOC thresholds; We have therefore developed a concept for
an aqueous coating system based on a secondary polyacrylic
dispersion to yield the required drying and hardness. This
dispersion is cured under mild conditions with a hydrophili-
cally modified polyisocyanate hardener. The resulting films
satisfy the highest requirements in terms of appearance, es-
hardeners is used.
Secondary polyacrylic dispersions are produced by poly-
merizing acrylic acid esters with hydroxyfunctional acrylic
acid esters, acidfunctional monomers, styrene or other vinyl
monomers to produce a vinyl copolymer of low to medium
molecular weight. The organic solution is neutralized with
amine and then dispersed in water. The molecular weight,
acid group content and degree of neutralization must be op-
timized to get a fine dispersion with minimal hydrophilicity.
The dispersion should possess good emulsifying prop-
hardener.
erties for the comparatively hydrophobic polyisocyanate
The polyisocyanate hardener can be mixed into this dis-
persion by hand. After application, the film is tack-free but
not yet fully cured after drying for 30 min at 60°C. Final
cross-linking is achieved after several days at room temper-
ature. This can be seen in the successive increase in the pen-
dulum hardness and the improved resistance to solvents and
chemicals.
M. Meichiors er al. /Progress in Orgowic Coxutings 40 (2000) 99J09
Fig. 2 shows the performance properties achieved with
our aqueous 2K-PUR systems compared with conventional
2K-PUR systems. The main feature is the some 85% re-
duction in the organic solvent content. However, it can also
be seen that the second-generation aqueous 2K-PUR sys-
tem matches the conventional systems in all key properties.
By optimizing the acrylic binder drying properties, hardness
and chemical resistance of the coatings could be improved
without reduction in gloss and transparency. As yet, we have
no Florida weathering data for the new generation of aque-
ous 2K-PUR coatings. However, we are sure that these val-
ues will at least match the high level produced by the first
generation of aqueous 2K-PUR coatings.
Aqueous 2K-PUR coatings based on polyacrylate sec-
ondary dispersions have a good chance to enter the automo-
tive refinish market. It remains to be seen over the next few
years whether the market is ready to accept this new tech-
nology. In the field of commercial vehicle finishing, aqueous
2K-PUR coatings are already being used successfully. For
example, tramcars in Cologne, Germany, are finished with
a system which uses aqueous 2K-PUR formulations from
primer to topcoat.
3. Special-effect coating:
One interesting development in recent years is represented
by soft-feel coatings. These are pigmented special-effect
coatings with a soft mat surface which is warm and anything
from rubbery to velvety to the touch. This is known as the
soft-feel effect. Such coatings are used to coat plastics, e.g.
the instrument panel in a car.
Up until now, this special effect was achieved using back
foamed PVC films. The disadvantages of this are the com-
plex and expensive technique of film-laminating molded
plastic components and their contribution to fogging inside
the car, caused by the migration of the plasticizer out of the
PVC.
Coating therefore represents a better altermative. The
soft-feel effect can be achieved by the design of the binder
and the formulation. However, no plasticizer is required.
Furthermore, the paint film acts as a barrier to the migration
of substances from the plastic substrate. Coating is also less
expensive and less complex than film lamination.
soft-feel effect. At the same time, the coating must dis-
play very good resistance to chemicals and solvents. Stay-
ing with the example of the instrument panel, it should
be resistant to substances such as suntan lotion, creams,
leaking liquids or cleaning agents, even at high temper-
atures and exposed to sunlight. The coating must not be
very hard but should have good flexibility as the plastic
components must also withstand mechanical stresses at
low temperatures without damage to the coating. Last but
not least, the coating system must have good adhesion on
plastics.
Fz.2.Ckarcots amx
Solveotbone
2K-PUR coatings have evolved into 
systems of choice for plastics coating because of their mild
drying conditions and their characteristic combination of
hardness and flexibility. Points in favor of aqueous coat
scope for system design.
Our waterborme 2K-PUR soft-feel coating is a com-
bination of a high molecular weight polyurethane dis-
persion with a low molecular weight hydroxyfunctional
polyesterpolyurethane dispersion cross-linked with a hy-
drophilically modified polyisocyanate. The properties of
the coating in terms of improved chemical resistance or a
better soft-feel effect can be influenced by the choice of
Xq pue aeueoospod poypou Aeoqdoupsq oqens t
the composition of the binder combination. Film formation
yields a polyurethanepolyurea network with a defined net-
work chain length. In such a system, the hydroxyfunctional
polyurethane dispersion is responsible for good resistance
to solvents and chemicals. The dispersion also contains an
adequate density of OH groups to ensure effective chemical
cross-linking [16].
Manufacturing of this binder involves the reaction of a
special hydroxyfunctional polyester with a hydroxyfunc-
tional acid component (for hydrophilic modification) and a
polyisocyanate via urethane bonds, The urethanization reac-
tion is carried out in the melt with the aid of small quanti
ties of solvent. The mixture is subsequently neutralized with
amine and dispersed in water. The binder dispersions gen-
erally have a particle size of about 100 nm. This yields fine
coating dispersions after incorporation of the hardener. They
cure to form high-performance films.
Fig. 3 shows the good property profile of our aqueous
2K-PUR soft-feel coatings compared with solventborme
2K-PUR soft-feel coatings and backfoamed PVC films.
The first striking advantage of the aqueous 2K-PUR sys-
tem compared with the conventional 2K-PUR coating is
the very much lower level of solvent emissions from the
0ud on pos Aan ane stuaiss Sueos qog uasAs snoanbe
duce the soft-feel effect. This is also seen from the very
good low-temperature flexibility of both coatings. The films
both have a very good soft-feel effect although the aqueous
system is even better. However, assessment of the feel of
the film is highly subjective. The solventborne 2K-PUR
system shows the well-known high level of resistance. This
is largely matched by the aqueous system. In both cases,
the abrasion resistance is good. The crockmeter test, which
measures abrasion on exposure to ethanol, is good in both
systems. Likewise, the adhesion on various plastics is good.
Only in the case of polypropylene and similar plastics pre-
treatment of the component is necessary to ensure that the
by the coating-
surface tension of the substrate is high enough for wetting
If backfoamed films are used, the soft-feel effect can be
haraclenesticsofsoft-feelcoat
Properties of different soft-feel systems
the backfoamed film. This reduces the typical *new" smell
aqueous coating system performs significantly better than
inside the car. A further advantage of the polyurethane coat
ings is that they can be matted to make them nonreflective
4.Waterborne2K-PURsystems
4.1. Basics
An important part of our work on waterborne 2K-PUR
coatings has been focused on the fundamental investiga-
tion of the main and side reactions and their infuencing
parameters [14]. After formulation of the 2K-PUR coating.
drying was investigated. The waterborne 2K-PUR coatings
its behavior during pot life, application, film formation and
used consisted of an aqueous hydroxyfunctional secondary
polyacrylate dispersion and a hardener combination of a
hydrophobic polyisocyanate and a hydrophilically modified
polyisocyanate.
In the example described here, the system contained a
hydroxyfunctional amine neutralization agent and a hydro-
xyfunctional co-solvent, in addition to the polyol and the
hardener. As well as the desired cross-linking reaction bet-
ween the polyol and the hardener to form a polyurethane net-
work, other reactions of the isocyanate are possible (Fig. 4)
with the OH groups of the co-solvent and the neutralization
agent, with the carboxyl groups of the polyol and with the
water [12]. As there is a large excess of OH groups from
the water in relation to the reactive groups of the polyol, it
was long time assumed to be impossible to produce aqueous
2K-PUR systems. In the first step of this side reaction with
the water, an amine and carbon dioxide are formed. Because
of its high reactivity, the amine reacts immediately with an
isocyanate group to form urea. The carbon dioxide dissolves
in the aqueous phase; afterwards it either dissolves in the
paint film or escapes as gas, when the water evaporates from
the film during film formation and curing. Whether and to
what extent the carbon dioxide causes bubbles in the paint
film will be discussed at the end of this paper.
asoreactwitt
reactivity of the carboxyl groups is 
ever, once the amine neutralizatior
eaves the paint
the coating system,
esistance
copy of
it is sometimes better to use an excess of polyisocyanate
in relation to the OH groups of the polyol. The result is
a strong urethane network with additional urea and amide
structures.
After the polyol and polyisocyaniate have
been mixed,
the cross-linking reaction and the side reactions described
begin. Initially, the'viscosity of the coating increases slowly,
  nod  p s od   n uss
offen defined as the time taken for the viscosity of the coating
to double. However, what is important is the time at which
the coating can still be applied to yield a perfect film
During this time, the NCO content decline
consistently by
which have reacted form ure:
The carbon dioxide
plains the decrease in the pH. This is typical for an aqueous
2K-PUR system although the distribution of the down-
stream isocyanate products also depends on the reactivity
and structure of the components used in the formulation
Whereas urea formation dominates during the pot life
because of the large excess of water, this changes during the
course of film formation and curing. The extent of the main
and side reactions is influenced greatly by the application
conditions, especially the curing conditions.
At room temperature, the water evaporates relatively
quickly, despite its low vapor pressure (Fig. 6). Within
30 min, the water concentration in the paint film has de-
creased to 23%. It subsequently forms an equilibrium with
the atmospheric moisture at about 1%. Even in conventional
systems, the reaction of the isocyanate groups with atmo-
spheric moisture cannot be prevented entirely. Compared
with the evaporation rate of the water, the decrease of the
NCO content in the paint film is slow. After 30 min at room
temperature, around 6% of the NCO groups have reacted.
This increases to about 90% after 24 h. Full reaction takes
several days at room temperature.
Drying parameters such as temperature and atmospheric
humidity play a key role here, as Fig. 7 shows. During cur-
ing at room temperature, around 60% of the NCO groups
react to form urea. Force-drying for 30 min at 130C re-
duces this amount to around 10% and the water content
decreases to less than 0.5% after just a few minutes. If dry-
ing continues at 50°C rather than at room temperature, there
is little evidence of urea formation. In addition to more
urethane groups, increasing temperature also yields a larger
proportion of amide groups resulting from the reaction of
the carboxyl groups with the isocyanate:
However, the larger amount of urea formed under mild
curing conditions need not have a detrimental effect on
the film properties as shown by, e.g. our aqueous 2K-PUR
industrial metal coating, vehicle repair and parquet coating
applications.
4.Bsrtwalerbone2k-PRcoarrg
disadvantage that bubbles and microfoam tend to form in
thick coats, These are caused by entrapment of air during
snoonbe Aq posns opnad squng  uoeode Keads
2K-PUR coatings is that the carbon dioxide yielded by the
side reaction with water forms bubbles.
ance of bubbles, paint films were observed using very high
resolution video endoscopes during flash-off and curing. The
apparatus allowed the specific observation of every section
The bubbles observed were incorporated in the film during
application. Various things then happen as shown in Fig. 9
from left to right. In ideal circumstances, the bubbles rise
to the surface of the film and escape. However, if the film
Fig. 8. Two still photos of bubbles in paint films taken at a 30 min interval
surface hardens too quickly, the bubbles burst as they break
through the surface and leave small craters. Most bubbles
become smaller as they rise to the surface. Some dissolve
in the surrounding medium before they reach the surface
and disappear. However, if the film cures too quickly, the
increased viscosity means that the bubbles cannot rise to the
surface and remain trapped in the film. Bubbles which do
not dissipate fully during flash-off can thus become fixed in
the film during baking.
In our investigations, we were able to prove that no
bubbles are formed by reaction during film formation and
drying. The carbon dioxide that forms dissolves in the film
or attaches itself to the air bubbles incorporated during ap-
plication. The key factors in the production of bubble-free
films, even in the case of thick coats, are thus the same
parameters as when working with aqueous one-component
coatings: control of the rheology and viscosity of the paint
film during drying, the choice of flash-off and drying con-
ditions and the promotion of deaeration by the adition of
effective defoamers.
Aqueous 2K-PUR systems are still a new technology,
which is no longer in its infancy. Two representative exam-
ples of applications show that aqueous 2K-PUR coatings
offer a realistic and economical altermative to solventbome
2K-PUR coatings. They enable the user to reduce VOC val-
ues considerably without having to sacrifice quality. Funda-
mental knowledge of the reactions proceeding in waterborme
2K-PUR systems during pot life, film formation and drying
makes it easier to design and optimize the coating to fulfil
specific demands.
optimistic for the future and are convinced that in the coming
of the market where high-perfot
References
1] D.
135
[2]M
[3] L.
M. Meichiors er al. /Progress in Orgowic Coxutings 40 (2000) 99J09
12. AQUEOUS POLYURETHANE DISPERSIONS AND COATINGS PREPARED THEREFROM
46. Aqueous polyurethane
50. Polyurethane based nanocomposite coatings tc
