ISSN: (Print) 1568-5551 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tdmp20
Epoxymodifiedbio-basedhyperbranched
polyurethanethermosets
HemjyotiKalita&NiranjanKarak
nyperbranched polyurethe
10.1080/15685551.2012.747163
To link to this article: https://dol.org/10.1080/15685551.2012.747163
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journallinformation?journalCode=tdmp20
Hemjyoti Kalita and Niranjan Karak*
Modificationof the existingpolymersleads
system was cured by cycloaliphatic amine hardener at 120 °C for a specified period of time. The curing reaction was
hyperbranched polyurethane was modified with different amounts of bisphenol-A based epoxy resin. The modified
qs (91s)qus asu  ps uas pe dds pmu s sm q pu
hardness (310 kg) and gloss 85°94°) increased with the increase of epoxy content. The themo-gravimetric analysis
showed the enhancement of thermal stability (240291 °C) of the modified systems. Biodegradation was tested by the
broth culture technique and the modied hyperbranched polyurethanes also exhibited adequate biodegradation.
Incorporation of reactive modifer into the polyurethane network was demonstrated to be an effective way to improve
the thermal and mechanical properties, simultaneously.
analysis
1.Introduction
Polyurethane has some specificity with respect to its film
fomming ability, good toughness, high abrasion resistance,
good chemical resistance, excellent adhesion, high tear
strength, tunable mechanical strength, adequate flexibility
and elasticity, including fabrication versatility due to the
versatility in structure and composition of the compo-
nents [13]. Polyurethanes are generally segmented
block copolymers having altermating soft and hard seg-
ments. Owing to the polar character of urethane groups,
the hard urethane domains are hydrophilic in contrast to
the soft polyol domains that cause the micro-phase sepa-
ration in the structure. The soft segment of the polyure-
thanes is usually moderately high-molecular weight
polyol which is relatively flexible in nature. The hard
segment is composed of a disocyanate and a low-molec-
ular weight diol or diamine chain extender and hence rel-
atively rigid. Depending on the physical and chemical
nature of the segments or the ratio of soft to hard seg-
ments, polyurethane exhibit a wide range of physical
properties. Thus it is widely applied as coating material,
sealant, adhesive, paint, leather, foam etc. The presence
of two-phasic morphology resulting from micro-phase
separation of soft and hard segments and strong hydro-
gen bonding between the hard segments of polyurethane
with altemative hard and soft segments exhibits the
enhanced mechanical, thermal and chemical properties
[4,5]. A large number of reports are in the literature on
*Coresponding author. Email: nkarak(@tezu.ermet.n
the effects of the structure of the hard and soft segments
on the physical, thermal and chemical properties of these
[sud q auoe o oqrssod ose s! 1 [89] suod
nism, blending or via interpenetrating network formation
with the other polymers. Epoxy resins are one of the
most important classes of thermosetting matrices, which
possess good mechanical, thermal, dielectric behavior,
low shrinkage during curing, low creep, good adhesive
strength, excellent corrosion and weather resistance,
good chemical resistance, dimensional stability, wide
range of cure schedules and their easy processibilities
[913]. Polyurethane can be linked to the epoxy network
through physical as well as chemical bonding and so it
is used to modify polyurethane [14,15].
Recently, vegetable oils have drawn great attention
because of their advantages like sustainability, easy
availability, versatility in structure and properties, biode-
gradability, environmental friendly and overall low cost
[1619]. The high price of the petroleum raw materials,
turn down of the petroleum reserves, and stringent
environment rules and regulations have promoted the
utilization of vegetable oils as the feedstock for the
development of many industrially important polymers
[2022]. The bio-based polymeric materials exhibit better
synthetic counterparts.The most extensively used
vegetable oils are castor, sunflower, safflower, soybean,
com, and linseed oils. A large variety of wildly grown
plants and herbs are available in India. Mesua ferreα
L. plant is abundant in different region of this country
and its seeds surprisingly contain high amount (70%) of
oil. Mesua ferrea L. seed oil is one of the most impor-
tant vegetable oil for the production of many useful
industrial polymers. This oil possesses mainly triglycer-
ides of oleic (52.3%), linoleic (22.3%), palmitic (15.9%)
and stearic (9.5%) acids [23].
Authors, therefore, wish to report here the perfor-
mance characteristics of epoxy modified hyperbranched
polyurethanes
(HBPUs)
1
different
amounts
bisphenol-A based diglycidyl ether epoxy resin and
Of
cycloaliphatic amine.
2.Experimenta
2.1.Material
Mesaa ferrea L. seeds were collected from Darang,
Assam, India. The oil was isolated by solvent soaking
bS exe Kq pgndpue po
Monoglyceride of the oil was prepared by the standard
procedure [24]. Glycerol (Merck, India), poly(e-caprolac-
tone)diol (PCL, Solvay Co., Japan M, = 3000 g/mol),
1,4-butanediol (Merck, Germany) and triethanolamine
(Merck, India) were used after drying in an vacuum oven.
toluene disocyanate (TDL, SigmaAldrich, Germany)
Calcium oxide (S.D. Fine Chemical Ltd, India) and
were used as received. Xylene (Merck, India) was
vacuum distilled and kept in 4A type molecular sieves
before use. The epoxy resin, a glycidyl bisphenol-A based
epoxy (product of epichlorohydrine and bisphenol-A)
with epoxy equivalent of 182192 g/equivalent and
cycloaliphatic amine hardener (Ciba Geigy, India) were
used as supplied.
.2.Preparation ofhyperbranchedpofyurethan
dois om e q paedad sem sueamfod pououequad
one pot A + B; approach. A 250 mL three-neck round
bottom flask equipped with a nitrogen inlet tube, a ther-
mometer, an oil bath and a mechanical stirrer for this
polymerization reaction. Required amounts of PCL
(2 mol) and monoglyceride of Messa ferrea L. seed oil
(3 mol) were taken in the reaction flask with 20 mL of
xylene at constant stirring. An exactly required amount of
TDI (10 mol) was slowly injected into the reaction mix-
ture at room temperature. The reaction temperature was
slowly increased to 70 °C and the reaction was allowed to
stir for 3h to obtain a viscous mass, which was treated as
pre-polymer. The reaction mixture was then allowed to
cool to room temperature followed by the addition of
required amount of 1,4-butanediol (2.75 mol) and trietha-
nolamine (1.5 mol). The temperature of the reaction
mixture was then increased slowly to 110 °C and stired
continuously for about 2h and stopped before gelation.
The polymer was obtained as a solution of 3035% solid
content (w/v) in xylene. The yield obtained after the
isolation from solution by precipitation in a non-solvent
followed by vacuum drying in an oven at 50 °C for 2
days, was 98%.
2.3.Modlification of hyperbranched polyurethane with
epoxy resin
The HBPU of 3035% solid content in xylene directly
obtained from the polymerization reaction. was mixed
with epoxy resin (100% solid content) and cycloaliphatic
amine hardener (50% by weight with respect to the
epoxy resin) in the desired proportion as given in Table 1.
The mixing was carried out under constant and vigorous
o no  q o  m o e 
proper homogenization of the components. The modified
HBPU films were obtained by drawing the homogenous
mixture of the solution in glass plates followed by
vacuum degassing and cured at specified time and
temperature for further testing and analysis.
slndy
The mild steel strips of 0.12 × 0.10 × 0.002 m? were
coated by the above prepared homogeneous polymer
solutions for impact resistance and scratch hardness stud-
ies. After removal of sufficient amount of solvent under
atmospheric condition, the coated strips were degassed
under vacuum to remove the last trace of entrapped sol-
vent. Then the films were cured by heating at 120°C in
an oven for a specified period of time. Finally, the cured
films were kept under ambient condition for 24 h for fur-
ther investigations. The dried films were peeled off from
the glass plates by immersing the plates in warm water,
 Sueo a uaao tnsea e u Sup Aq pamoog
ness of the films was found to be 3540 μm as measured
   
Sheen Instrument Ltd, UK).
2.5.Broth culture technique for biodegradatiot
Mineral salt medium with the following composition was
prepared for the study. 2.0 g NaHPOa, 2.0 g (NHa)SO4
70 mg ZnSOg7HO, 4.75 g KHPO4, 1.2 g MgSO4-
7HO, 0.5 mg CaC1·2HO, 10 mg H,BO,-5HO, 100 mg
MnSO5HO, 100 mg CuSO47HO, 1mg FeSO4-7HO
and 10 mg MoO; were dissolved in 1.0 L of demineral-
ized water. 10 mL of this liquid culture medium was
poured into 50 mL conical flask and was sterilized using
autoclave at 121 °C and 15 Ib pressure for 15 min. The
autoclaved media were
then allowedto coolroom
temperature and the polymer films were immersed to the
media under sterile condition inside a laminar air hood.
Media containing no polymer film were also cultured as
negative control. P. aeruginosa strain MTCC 7814 bacte-
ria was selected for this study. The bacterial strain was
culture in the above prepared mineral media for 48 h at
37°C. The 100 μL of culture medium containing
10* mL
microbes (as calculated from McFarland
 p   po s (p 
containing 10mL media. The flask was then incubated
under sterile condition at 37 °C for the biodegradation
study.
2.6.Characterization
The infrared spectra of the polyurethanes were recorded
by impact 410, Nicolet (Madison, USA) (FTIR) spectro-
photometer using KBr pellets. The X-ray diffraction
study was carried out at room temperature (ca. 25 °C) by
a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer (Miniflex, UK) over a
range of 20= 10700. The thermal analysis, (TGA) was
done by a Simadzu, Japan themmal analyzer, TG50, with
a nitrogen flow rate of 30 mL/min at heating rate of
10 °C/min. The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
was done by DSC 60, Simadzu, Japan at 3 °C/min heat-
ing rate under the nitrogen flow rate of 30 mL/min from
(30 to 150) °C. The surface morphology was studied by
a scanning electron microscope (SEM) of model JSM-
6390LV (JEOL, Japan) after platinum coating on the
surface. The gloss of the films was measured by using
mini-gloss meter (Sheen instrument Ltd, UK). Scratch
hardness of the dry film was measured by using a scratch
tester, model number 705 (Sheen instrument Ltd, UK)
with stylus accessory and a travel speed of 0.030.04 m/s.
The tensile strength and clongation at break were mea-
sured with the help of the Universal Testing Machine
(UTM), Zwick Z010, Germany with a 10 × 10?N load
cell and crosshead speed of 0.05 m/min using samples of
dimensions: 0.1 m × 0.01 m × 0.00035 m.The impact
resistance was measured by an impact tester (S.C. Dey &
Co., India, 1.0 m is the maximum height) using the stan-
dard ASTM D 1037 falling weight method. A weight of
0.85 kg was allowed to fall on the mild steel plate coated
film from minimum to maximum height up to which the
film was not damaged. The maximum height was taken
as the impact resistance. The chemical resistance test was
performed using the standard ASTM D 54367 method
by taking the weighted amount of dry film in different
chemical media of 250 mL beakers containing 150 mL of
the individual chemical medium for the specified period
of time. The chemical resistance was determined by
measuring the weight change for the individual film after
the completion of test period.
m Ss q no p se Sums 
(W)
cured
film
IⅡ
dimethyl
formamide
(DMF). The samples were removed from the solvent
after attaining equilibrium and the weight of the swollen
film (W,) was also measured. The swelling value was
calculated by using the following formula:
3. Results and discussion
The modified system reported here has significant differ-
ences compared to the earlier reported system [16].
Firstly, the polyurethane used here is a vegetable oil
based hyperbranched polyurethane containing triethanola-
mine as the branch generating moiety. This system was
not reported earlier. Further, cycloaliphatic amine used as
the crosslinking agent to obtain the epoxy modified poly-
urethane thermoset, which was not reported earlier for the
similar system. Therefore, the present study is on a
completely new system except the same epoxy resin
used.
3.1.Curing study
From the curing study it was found that the touch free
time (minimum time required by the system to resist
impression on touching its surface by thumb) and drying
time (determined by indenting the cured film by an
indenter) decreased with the increase of amount of epoxy
resin and cycloaliphatic amine hardener at 120°C as
shown in Table 1. This may be due to the increased
cross-linking reaction between the epoxy/hydroxy1
groups of the epoxy resin with hydroxyl/urethane groups
of polyurethane resin in the presence of amine hardener.
linking mechanism (Scheme 1). Due to the increase of
This can be easily understood from the proposed cross-
the amount of epoxy and hardener, the number strained
oxirane and reactive amino groups increases so the inter-
cross-linking network formation also increases and
thereby afford a three dimensional network structure.
Furthermore, there is a possibility of the formation of
intermolecular H-bonding between C=O of the ure-
thane linkage and the OH of the epoxy resin present in
the system. The formation of network structure in the
modified polyurethanes is confirmed by the decrease in
Table 1. Compositions and curing time of modified HBPUs at
120 °C
Scheme 1.Proposed cross-linking reactions
lIs
916
nfimed the
fon
The FTIR spectra of polyurethane and modified polyure-
thane are shown in Figure 1. The characteristic bands of
urethane group appeared at 34063430 cm (NH
stretching) and 1729 cm (C=O stretching of urethane
linkage) [2,25]. There are two bands at 1627 cm for
amide I of urethane, 1470 cm for amide II of urethane.
The bands at 870 and 730 cm are due to the substi-
tuted aromatic ring of TDI. The disappearance of band
22502270 cm indicates that there is no free NCO
Figure
(a)
(b)
(e) HBPU30 
ing
The characteristic band of epoxy groups were appeared
at 916 cm~1 for the epoxy modified hyperbranched poly-
urethane before the curing, whereas the same was absent
after the curing that confirmed the participation of epoxy
groups in such reaction.
3.3.X-ray diffraction study
Figure 2 shows X-ray difracto-grams of unmodified and
modified HBPUs. The presence of crystalinity in the
thermoplastic hyperbranched polyurethane and modified
thermosetting polyurethane is confirmed by the XRD
analysis. There are two strong diffraction peaks at
20= 21.9° and 20=23.8° due to the (100) and (200)
planes of PCL crystals. The position of the peaks
remained same after the modification of hyperbranched
polyurethane, though the intensity gradually decreases
with the increase of epoxy content. This is may be due to
the increase of molecular restriction through cross-linking
and also decrease the percent of PCL in the matrix.
3.4.Morphology study
The morphological study of the HBPUs was carried out
with the help of scanning electron micrographs. Figure 3
shows the SEM micrographs of all the modified polyure-
thanes. The SEM micrographs indicate the unifomm phase
distribution of all the components of modified polyure-
thanes and also they confimed the formation of homoge-
neous intercross-linked network of the epoxy with
polyurethane as no extra phase was observed. The
compatibility of the systems may be attributed due to the
hyperbranched structure of the polyurethane as well as
polar-polar interactions as confirmed from DSC. Further-
more, there is a possibility of H-bonding between the
urethane linkages and the OH groups of epoxy resin
Figure 2. XRD difracto-grams for (a) HBPU, (b) HBPU10,
(c) HBPU20 and (d) HBPU30.
present
system
Thus
or the
Thermal study
Thermo-gravimetric analysis is one of the potential tech-
niques for evaluation of thermal stability of materials.
The thermal stability of the modified polyurethanes and
unmodified polyurethane is shown in Figure 4. The
mechanism of thermal decomposition of polyurethane
involves three steps. The urethane linkage degradation
starts from 180230°C, which is called as the tempera-
ture of onset degradation. The degradation of aromatic
moiety occurs at about 340380°C. The final stage at
about 400600 °C may be atributed to thermal degrada-
tion of isocyanurate rings and carbodimide linkages,
which leads to the evaporation of CO, and the formation
of char [26]. The thermo stability of the modified system 
depends on the degree of thermo-stable moiety, cross-
linking density and free volumes present in the systems.
One of the most effective ways to augment the thermal
stability of polyurethane is introducing high aromatic
ring concentrations in the hard or soft segments of the
polyurethane, because an aromatic ring has a high stabi-
lizing effect against thermal degradation [27]. On the
other hand thermal stability depends on the molecular
rigidity because chemical reaction and degradation
depends on macromolecular chain excitation and motion
gained from the thermal energy during exposure to a
polyurethanes increased with the increase of epoxy
heat. It is seen that the thermal stability of the modified
content. The incorporation of the epoxy resin in the polar
as well as the aromatic ring concentrations. Thus, the
molecular mobility of the chain is restricted and thereby
making the material rigid. As a result, the bond breaking
inside the bulk polymeric matrix requires high thermal
energy and makes inert from the oxidative environment.
Thus, the thermal stability enhances for the modified
polyurethanes.
The DSC curves of unmodified and modified HBPUS
shown in Figure 5. The experimental results indicate
that the glass transition temperature (7) was increased
with the
increase of epoxy content. This is due to the
increased rigidity of the structure that is formed through
different types of interactions as stated earlier.
3.6.Mechanicalproperlie
From the Table 2 it is found that the tensile strength of
the modified HBPUs increases with the increase
10
cpoxy content. The cnhancement can be atributed to the
eduo pue Aisup Suu-ssoo saao u asaou
ity
moietiesI
present
systen
e 3. SEM micrographs for (a) HBPU, (b) HBPU10, (c) HBPU20 and (d) HBPU30
Figure 4. TGA thermo-grams
for (a) HBPU, (b) HBPU10
(c) HBPU20 and (d) HBPU30.
through polar-polar interaction and uniform distribution
of epoxy in the polyurethane matrix. The increase
in
 m q pons s p -ss
DMF. Due to the increase cross-linking density makes
the
material stiffer and causes the higher ultimate
strength. However, the elongation at break decreases
with the increase of the epoxy content. This is due to the
decrease in chain mobility and increase in rigidity of the
Figure 5. DSC curves for
(a)HBPU, (b)HBPU10,
(c) HBPU20 and (d) HBPU30.
structure. The scratch hardness of the modified polyure-
thanes also increased with the increase of epoxy content
that causes the inerease in overall toughness and rigidity
of the structure. The bending test results indicated that
all the samples possess sufficient flexibility as the films
could be bent onto a rod of 0.002 m diameter without
any crack in the bent films. This is mainly due to the
high flexibility of the soff segment and the presence
[able 2. Mechanical properties of unmodified and modified HBPUs
1.0 m is the limit of the instrument
long chain fatty acid moiety in the structure of the poly-
urethanes. All the modified polyurethanes showed the
excellent impact resistance. Impact strength of the mate-
rial may be explained from the angle of toughness of the
films that is the ability to absorb the applied external
energy as well as the transfer of energy to its adjacent
molecular chains. The gloss is an optical property of
materials and depends on the smoothness of the surface.
The gloss property measured at an angle of 60° and it is
seen that all the films exhibit good gloss.
Chemical resistance
Chemical resistance tests of all the modified and unmodi-
fied HBPUs were studied under various chemical envi-
ronments (Table 3) such as 3% NaOH, 20% EtOH, 5%
HC1, 10% NaCl and distilled water for 10 days. All the
films showed very good chemical resistance in almost all
the chemical environments, except NaOH solution. This
is due to the presence of alkali hydrolysable ester groups
of PCL and monoglyceride segments. The very good
chemical resistance of the films may be due to the pres-
ence of secondary interactions such as polar-polar and
H-bonding, increased cross-linking density, compact
structure and presence of aromatic moiety etc.
3.8.Biodegradation study
The biodegradation of the unmodified hyperbranched
polyurethane and modified hyperbranched polyurethane
were tested and confirmed by direct exposure to bacterial
strain by broth culture technique. In the present investi-
Table 3.  Chemical resistance as changes of weight (g) of
gation, P aeruginosa of strain number MTCC 7814 was
used for the biodegradation study. The growth of the
bacterial strain as obtained from McFarland Turbidity
method is shown in Figure 6. The bacterial population
was found to be lesser in the modified HBPUs as com-
parable to the unmodified polyurethane. This may be due
to the presence of cross-linking, synthetic bisphenol-A
based epoxy moiety, etc. in the modified system. There-
fore, it is very difficult to assess the modified system by
the microorganisms. However, the bacterial growth
decreased with the increase of the content of epoxy in
the modified systems. This is due to the increased cross-
linking density that makes the structure more compact
and rigid. On keeping the samples in broth culture media
for 45 days, they were found to be degraded. The
scanning electron micrographs of the unmodified
hyperbranched polyurethane and modified HBPUs after
the bacterial exposure are shown in Figure 7. Both the
unmodified hyperbranched polyurethane and modified
hyperbranched polyurethane after the biodegradation
study showed the significant surface erosion. Biodegra-
dation of the polyurethane depends on the process condi-
tions, chemical structure and compositions, morphology,
crystallinity, hard and soft segment ratio, etc. [28].
Figure 6.
(d) HBPU30.
HBPU,
HBPU10
(o)
HBPU20
igure 7.SEM micrographs for (a) HBPU, (b) HBPU10, (c) HBPU20 and (d) HBPU30 after biodegradation
Microorganisms utilized polyurethane as carbon and/or
nitrogen source. Generally, microbial degradation takes
place in two steps. The high molecular weight polymer
is initially hydrolyzed to form low molecular weight
polymer with weak mechanical property, which makes it
more accessible for the microbial assimilation followed
by consumption of oligomeric products to produce CO,
HO, bumus etc [29]. The presence of amorphous long
chain fatty acid moieties and PCL in the bio-based
hyperbranched polyurethane promotes microbial attack.
Conclusions
From the study it can be concluded that the bisphenol-A
amine successfully modified the hyperbranched polyure-
thane with good performance. The properties like tensile
strength, scratch hardness, gloss and thermal stability
significantly increased with the increase of epoxy con-
tent. The uniform and homogeneous mixing of the com-
ponents in all the modified systems results such
performance. The modified hyperbranched polyurethane
also showed the significant biodegradation as indicated
by the broth culture technique. Thus the epoxy modified
HBPUs can be used as an advanced thin film thermoset-
ting material.
Acknowledgements
The
Technology (DST), India through the g
10
SR/S3/ME/
0020/2009-SERC,
Grants Comr
through
the
References
