Recent trendsin environmentally friendly water-borne polyurethane coatings
Institute of Chemistry, Government College University, Faisalabad 38030, Pakistan
(Received 15 August 2015 • accepted I1 Noverber 2015)
AbstractEnvironmentally friendly waterborne polyurethane (WPU) coatings are used extensively due to their low
VOCs emission than solvent based PU coatings. Additionall, WPU coatings have low temperature flexibility, pH sta-
bility, water resistance, superior solvent resistance, outstanding weathering resistance and desirable chemical and mech
anical properties. This review provides an overview on the recent developments of WPU coatings and their value added
applications in the coatings and paint industry: UV-cured WPU coatings provide an important class of green and eco
friendly coatings with outstanding mechanical properties and rapid curing system. Hyper-branched polyurethanes
(PUs) show interesting properties, such as high solubility, reactivity and good rheological behavior owing to muliple
end groups, compact molecular structure and diminishing chain entanglement. Inherently: WPU coatings have reduced
stiffness and mechanical strength that can be increased by the addition of nanoparticles, like Ag, Cu, TiO, SiO, and
many more. Fire retardants, commonly phosphorous, are incorporated in the WPU' structure to increase the flame
retardancy of WPU' coatings.
Keywords: WPU, Eco-friendly Coatings, UV-WPU, Hyperbranched, Flame Retardan
INTRODUCTION
A variety of polymeric systems are employed in coating many
products of everyday life including airplanes, automobiles, oil tank-
es, container ships, industrial machines, household refrigerators
etc. [1-3]. Organic coatings protect the materials against aggres-
sive environments such as moisture, radiation, biological deterio-
ration, mechanical and chemical destruction as well as providing
color and gloss to the material [4,5]. However, most of the tradi-
Jo xumoure a8mq e ueuoo sfugeoo spue8so auoq-uaps euon
volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are detrimental to the
atmosphere and human health [6]. Therefore, environmentally
friendly coatings, such as waterbome coatings, high-solid content
to be a proper substiute for the traditional solent-based coatings
coatings powder coatings and radiation curable coatings, have proven
[7-10]. Among them WPU coatings have been paid progressive
attention in the coating industry due to their low temperature flex-
ibility zero or less VOCs, water resistance, pH stability, superior
solvent resistance, excellent weathering resistance and desirable
chemical and mechanical properties [11-19]. UV-cured WPU coat-
ing technology is used extensively due to their environment friendlly
behavior, high curing speed and low energy consumption [20], The
mechanical strength and stiffness of WPU flms is classically infe-
rior to most solvent borme PU films; hence, incorporation of nano-
particles in WPU enhances the stiffness and mechanical strength
[21-28]. Hyperbranched WPUs have been widely used to formu-
late high performance coatings, while fire resistance WPUs are em-
Polyurethanes
elastomers, rigid insulation, soft flexible foam, elastic fiber or as an
integral skin. The development of PU adhesive can be traced back
more than 50 years to the pioneering efforts of one man's genius.
Otto Bayers (1902-1982) and his co-workers work dates back to
the beginning of World War I, when it was first developed as a
replacement for rubber. Bayer is recognized as the “father” of the
PUs industry for his invention of the basic disocyanate polyaddi-
tion process During World War II PU coatings were used for the
impregnation of paper and the manufacture of mustard gas resistant
garments, high-gloss airplane finishes and chemical and corrosion-
resistant coatings to protect metal, wood and masonry [29]. At the
same time, the fist metal-to-plastic urethane adhesives were devel-
oped The WPU was also being developed, with PU latex claimed
to be useful as an adhesive disdosed in 1961 by DuPont [30]. With
the development of a low-cost polyether polyol, flexible fams opened
the door to the upholstery and automotive applications we know
today. Today, PUs can be found in virtually everything we touch
desks, chairs, cars, dothes, footwear, appliances, beds as well as the
insulation in our walls and roof and moldings on our homes [31-36].
WATER-BORNE POLYURETHANE (WPU) COATINGS
Due to strict regulations all over the world about volatile organic
compounds (VOCs), which affect health and atmosphere, envi-
-1daoe pue endod Suoooq ane sfungeoo Apuapy Ageuauuon
able to meet the growing consumer demands but maintaining ex-
cellent performance and cost. Among these low VOCs technolo-
gies the non-solvent based system is the best choice. Particularly,
Iable 1. Composition and :
because water is a cheap, non-toxic and environmentally benign
solvent, which may increase the rates and effectiveness of a wide
variety of organic reactions [37-39]. Therefore, WPU material has
gained an increasing attention in last few decades owing to having
several advantages like good abrasion resistance, flexibiity hard-
ness, impact resistance, gloss, chemical resistance, reduced flam
mabity, durabiity, high adhesive strength, easy eaning, low viscosity
and weather-ability in adition to zero or low emission of VOCs
[4048]. The viscosity of the WPU dispersion does not depend on
molecular weight of the polymer; therefore, high solid content WPU
dispersions can be prepared having a high molecular weight films
with excellent quality merely by physical drying, In this short review
environmentally friendly WPU coatings are highlighted in addi
tion to an outline of potential applications that have been investi
Fig. 1. (A) Schematic representation of WPU dispersion; (B) Scher
micelles formed by(a)Gationc and (b) anonuc PU1onx
gated up till now, which are summarized in Table 1 [49-100]
which PU particles are dispersed in aque
ous phase [101]. Inherently, polyurethanes are not dispersible in
COXILIL
water due to presence of hydrophobic isocyan
water), while WPUs are dispersible into aqueous media due to pres-
ates (also react with
ence of ionic groups (ie., PU ionomers) in linear thermoplastic
PU backbone (Fig. 1(a)) [102,103]. PU ionomer is defined as a co-
polymer containing a PU backbone with the repeat units carrying
pendant acid groups, which are comletly o partially nutralied
to form salts. These ionic groups act as an intermal emulsifier [104,
105] may be (i) cationic-like quaternary ammonium groups, (i)
anionic-like carboxylated or sulfonated groups (ii) or nonionic,
eg, pohyos with ethylene xide end groups 106] Schematic dia-
mers in water are showm in Fig, 1(b) [107]. Types of ionomers, choice
of isocyanate and types of polyols are major factors which influ-
ence the performance of the resulting WPU dispersions [108-112].
1. Synthetic Processes for WPU Dispersion
Several synthetic routes are developed to obtain WPU disper-
sion, including (i) acetone process, (i) melt dispersion process, (i)
[S11-E11 sd suuax (at) pue saood upqu podad
However, the first step is common to all of these processes, that is,
the reaction of appropriate diols or polyols, generally macrodilos
like polyethers or polyesters, with a molar excess of disocymates or
reaction mixture a diol with an ionic group or a nonionic group
polyisocynates to yield a low molecular weight prepolymer. In the
is usually an intermal emulsifier which becomes part of the main
chain of the prepolymer. Dispersion of the prepolymer in aqueous
media and the molecular weight buildup is the key step in which
the various synthetic pathways differ [116-119]. The most well-
known process for synthesizing WPU dispersion is the prepoly-
mer blending process and acetone process (Fig, 2(a) & (b) The
WPU dispersions properties are chiefly determined by hard and
process [129]
soft segment interactions and by ionic groups interactions. Recent
studies [120-129] established that the segmented structure, ionic
group content, moleular weight of the polyol, the kind of chain
extender and the hard and soft segments ratio decides the WPU
dispersions properties A variety of polyos, depending on the required
peoperties, are used in WPU dipersion synthes to change its struc-
ture and consequently design their properties. The most common
macrodiols used in PU synthesis are polyester, polyether, and poly-
carbonate and polycaprolactone diols.
2. One-component WPU Coatings
acquired a con-
Highly crosslinked PU films are formed, u
temperature, radiation oe atmospheric oxygen. Hydrogen bonding
in PU plays an essential role in determining the macroscopic prop-
Fig. 3. The AFM (a) and SEM (b) images of low gloss WPU films [139]
Fig. 4. Industrially important low viscous polyisocyanate cross-linker [146]
Recent trends in environmentally friendly water-borne polyurethane coatings: A review
physical crosslinks, thereby, strengthening the PU matrix and in
creasing its stiffness and strength [130-132]
2-1. One-component WPU Coating for Leather Material A Novel
Coating Material
Coatings, having low degree of gloss for leather materials, are
-gap pm uale Buu u&aou jo uopppe q pamdand uao
nite particle size distribution (such as SiO, particles) [133,134] But
there is a progressive loss of matting agent with time, which leads
to inrease n the degree of glos ofleather arfaes, bease of thir
incompatibility with the other organic constitutions of coatings
Therfore, matting agentsare nt fmlyatached and an e rbled
out from the coating easily [135-139]. Currently, one-component
WPU matting dispersions without inorganic matting agents have
been paid more and more aention in the coating industry. One
component WPU coatings with low gloss are used to alter the gloss
of leather. Atomic force microscopy (Fig 3(a) and scanning elec-
tron microscopy (Fig, 3(b) images of the WPU flm showed that
the micro surface was coarse with a number of spherical granules
that made the incident light to bend strongly, which is important
in producing low gloss leather surface.
Two-component waterbone PU (2K-WPU) coatings, usualy
used in wood and furniture industry [140], are produced with the
aim to increase woeking temperature range and final performance
by the introduction of chemical crolinker in the PU structure.
One component of 2K-WPU is usuall synthesized by polols, diso-
cyanates and hydrophilic group by using the acetone process or a
prepolymer mixing process Hardener or crosinke, another com-
r pue sde o papap Xuouxoo s dM-X jo uuod
matic isocyarnates [141-145]. Some of the industrially significant low
viscous polyisocyanate crolinkers for the production of thermo-
[91]   u umous ane sfueoo d pos u as
UV-CURABLE WPU COATINGS
During the last decade, UV-cured waterborme coatings technol-
ogy has been increasingly successful in the industrial coating mar-
ket due to less environmental impact along with novel performance
areas proper to protecting the material in aggressive conditions.
The UV curable coatings are cured in a short time under UV irra-
Fig, 5. Preparation of acrylic-terminated PU pre-polymer for UV cure coatings [169]
diation that provides the coatings with exceptional performance
[147-152]. The UV-curable WPU has the advantages of both UV
technology and waterbome coatings [153-155]. Atractivly, UV-
curable WPU (UV-WPU) coatings have been most generally stud-
ied because of their non-toxicity. versatility, chemical resistance
and escelent mechanical properties [156-160] The UV-WPU coat-
ings formulations typically contain three chief components: oligo-
mer, photoinitiator and reactive diuent [161]. The oligomer is func-
tionalized with reactive ending groups that contribute to the flm
production process and the visco-elastic peoperties of the final cured
film are govemed by the structure of the oligomer. The reactive
diluents reduce the viscosity of the resin and copolymerize with
oligomer to give the crosslinked film [162]. There are three main
kinds of oligomers extensively used in free radical UV-cured coat-
ings: epoxy acrylate, polyester acrylate and urethane acrylate oligo-
mer [163-168]. Usually, acrylic or methacrylic monomers are used
as reactive diluents (Fig. 5) for free radical based UV-curing sys-
tems [169].
tance to solvents and thermal stability than thos
se of traditional sol-
vent-based PU coatings and their tensile strength is reduced severely
at an external temperature higher than 80 °C [170,171]. Melamine,
a nitrogen-rich chemical, can be broadly used as additive to gener
ate melamine resin, which is a synthetic heat-resistant polymer
[172]. The TGA curves of the UV-WPU films, Fig, 6(left), showed
that the melamine modified UV-WPU film has higher initial ther-
mal decomposition temperature than film without melamine. The
Tg of the unmodifed film is lower than the modified film due to
increase in rigidity of content of the PU chain as ilustrated in the
DSC curves (Fig, 6-right).
HYPERBRANCHEDWPUCOATINGS
molecules with three-dimensional molecular
architectures, which
their customary linear counterparts due to thei
 unusual molecu
Fig. 6. The TGA curves of the UV-WPU films at the heating rate of 10°C/min (left) and The DSC curves of the UV-WPU films at the heat
ing rate of 20 °C/min (right) [172].
polymers show the most interesting properties, such as high solu-
bility and reactivity and good rheological behavioe; thus they have
great potential applications. Various types of hyperbranched poly-
Fig, 7. The steps involved along with the reaction
for the synthesis of different chain extender b
sed HBPU coatings [192].
[182], poly(ether ketone) [183,184], polyamides [185,186], poly(4-
chloromethy/styrene) [187] polyurethanes [188] etc., are commonly
developed by step-growth polycondensation route. Recently; hyper-
branched polyurethane (HBPU) coatings have been employed ex-
Recent trends in environmentally friendly water-borne polyurethane coatings: A review
tensively. Thermal and physical properties of PUs are changed by
varying the compositions and soft and hard segment ratios [189-
191]l. Synthesis of HBPU-urea or HBPU-imide coatings with the
detailed reaction condition and chain extenders used is shown in
Fig 7 [192].
NANOCOMPOSITEWPUCOATINGS
Waterborne polyurethane (WPU) coatings display an excellent
toughness and easticity, whle the stiffness and mechanical strength
of these films is obviously lower compared to most solvent based
PU coatings Addition of nano-sized inorganic filers into WPU
dispersions to form nano-structured coatings has become a suc-
cesfulstrategy to augment the poperties of WPU Coention-
ally fllers are added to coatings for imprwing pimentation, hiding
power, abrasion resistance, chalking resistance and offering anti
sagging and other flow properties, but they reduce coating clarity
and gloss [193,194]. Consequently, now fllers are investigated more
on nanoscale The partile size of fllers significantly infuences the
characteristics of coatings like mechanical properties, rheology,
corosin protection, barrier poperties, tc, particuarly when filles
d uL [s6] uu os mopq up apd aae ure anq
nano-composites containing nano-scale fillers, such as silica, ZnO,
TiO, Fe;O, SO, lay, cellulose nano-crystals, he distinctive pop
erties that are not studied with traditional microscale fllers. Addi-
tionally, thermal stability can be enhanced by incorporation of poly-
hedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) structures, the incorpora
tion of Si-O-Si cross-linker, use of functionalized fullerenes in PUs
and incorporation of carbon nanotubes (CNT) into PU [196-201].
1. Nanoparticle Containing Antimicrobial Coatings
of nano-partides (NP) as potential antimicrobial agents Basically,
metals used for nanoparticles, e.g, Si, Cu, Ti, Zn and other NP, in
coatings are extremely toxic against micro-organisms, which dimin-
ishes their active growth. Broad spectrum antimicrobial activity is
commonly exhibited by Ag NP, which is a renowned biocide [202-
206] In antibateral hygenicoatings, nanometal xides like TO,
ZnO, Al,O, SiO, are used, and these nano-metal oxides also find
applications in marine coatings, which hinders the attachment of
detrimental micro-oeganisms to the surface and making biofilms
Metal NP displays shape- and size-dependent interactions with a
microbial surface. The antimicrobial activity increases by decreas-
ing the size of metal NP due to their larger surface area per unit
volume. The small size aids the NP to dislodge the cell membrane,
simply penetrate into the bacterial cell and obstruct the normal
cell functioning of the cel 207-210]. 
FLAME-RETARDANTWPUCOATINGS
There is a developement of flame retardant PU coatings by in-
Creasing the public awareness about their potential as fire hazards.
Fire resistance of PU can be impeoved by incorporating either
reactive or nonreactive additive type fire retardants. The additive
type fire retardants (halogenated parafins, chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), inorganic oxides and hydroxides, inorganic carbonates,
boron containing inorganic compounds, inorganic phosphorus
containing compounds, triphenylphosphine oxide, red phospho-
rus, expandable graphite, melamine, etc) are added into the PU
ties, low compatibity and leaching Coersely reactive type fame
by physical means, which may result in poor mechanical proper-
retardants are mainly organic compounds having a flame retard-
ing moiety as well as active fumctional groups that can form covalent
bonds with PUs [211]. Flame retardants are cdusified as oeganic
materials such as halogenated and phosphorous compounds or inor-
ganic material like metal hydroxide, metal oxide and metal borates.
Although inorganic flame retardants are cost effective and hae non-
toxic byproducts, their efficacy is comparatively pitiable. Haloge-
nated compounds are effective flame retardants, but an elevated
temperture is required to begin the radical trapping activity and
these compounds also poses hazards due to emission of toxic gases
like hydrogen halides. Therefore, organic phospborous-containing
compounds are consideared to be non-toxic fire retardant addi-
tives by lowering the thermal decompostion and formation of char
at elevated temperature. In addition, the flame-retardant ability of
phosphorus-containing WPU is higher than that of halogenated
compounds. Phosphorous acid is produced at high temperature,
which helps in char formation and protects the polymer from flame
and heat. According to another proposed mechanism, there is a
reaction of phosphoric acid with carbodimide which is formed
during the thermolysis of PU [212-215].
THE ADVANTAGES OF THE RECENT STUDIES
The adlvantage of PU/polysiloxane hybrid coating/aluminum
interface relies on the interaction between the inorganic compo-
nent and a wide range of organic polymers that favor applicability
over different metallic substrates or coatings [3]. Studies revealed
that if an oil-based core molecule is well developed, it willsurely
be of advantageously reduced viscosity which wil failitate the com-
plete elimination of the use of solvents and reactive diluents in HYP
coatings Water-based coatings have been developed from vegeta-
ble oil generally prepared in water along with some co-sohent [7].
Furthermore, i is advantageous to use jatropha oil because it is non-
edible and thus its usage willreduce the consumption of edible oils
for chemical purposes [85]. Glycolyzed PET waste and castor oil-
based polyols for WPU adlhesives containing hexamethoxy methyl
melamine [86] have also been presented Although nanoparticles
hsve been widely employed to peepuare polymer composite materals
with advanced properties due to the synergistic advantage of nano-
scale dimensions, they tend to form aglomerates after incorporation
into the polymeric marix, leading to segregation of the inorganic
particles or limited improvement of the properties of the compos-
ite materials [45]. Ultraviolet, water, and thermal aging studies of
WPU elastomers-based high reflectivity coating [52] and the effects
of the molecular weight and structure of polycarbonate diols on the
CONCLUSION
poly-
ireth
 (WPU)
have many advantages such as low VOCs, flexibility, good mechani
cal and chemical peoperties. The WPU are dispersible in water due
to presence of hydrophilic ionic or non ionic groups in their struc-
ture. Pre-polymer mixing peocess and acetoe proces are the most
well-known methods for synthesizing WPU dispersions Introduc-
tion of cro-linker in 2K WPU increased the thermal stability and
final performances of coatings. The WPU coating cured by UV
radiations is a promising technology to prepare environmentall
safe, high curing rate and low energy consuming coatings. The UV.
WPU film modified by melamine film has higher initial thermal
decomposition temperature and Tg than film without melamine.
The hyper-branched PUs have multiple end groups, compact molec
ular structure and diminishing chain entanglement; therefore, they
apad u smdaumoo mou meusno a tuog uaagp anb ane
mance Nano-particles like Ag Cu, TiO, Al,O, SiO, clay, CNT,
POSS, are added to WPU to increase the stiffness and mechanical
strength, which is lower in conventional WPU. Ag-containing WPU
shows broad spectrum antimicrobial activity that increases by de-
creasing the size of metal NP due to their larger surface area per
unit volume. Fire retardants, mostly phosphorous, are used to in-
crease the flame retardancy of WPU coatings.
REFERENCES
26. H. T. Lee and L. H. Lin, Macrowof., 39, 6133 (2006),
 and W.K Lee, / Appi. Poly: Sci., 110,
36. X. D. Cao, H. Dong and C. M. Li, Bioucrowof., 8, 899 (2007).
37. M. Barrere and K. Landfester, Macromol., 36, 5119 (2003).
38. C. Xia, L I. Lee, T. W5dya and C. Macosko, Poly., 46, 775 (2005).
39. S. H. Back and B. K. Kim, Collods Sserf, A, 220, 191 (2003).
40. Y H. Guo, LJ. Guo, H. Miao, L J. Teng
41. G. J. Wang, C. S. K:
ng and R. G. Jin, Prog Org Coaf., 50, 55 (2004)
Recent trends in environmentally friendly water-borne polyurethane coatings: A review
89. Y. Lu, Y Xia and R. C. Larodk, Preg. Org Coat., 71, 336 (2011).
90. C. J. Patel and V. Mannari, Prog. Org. Coa., 77, 997 (2014).
91. K K. Jena, S. Sahoo, R. Narayan, T. M. Aminabhawi and K. V.S. N.
111. P Krol, B. Krol, P Holler and N. Telitsyna, Colloid. Pohywn. Sci
284, 1107 (2006)
116. D. Dieterich:
117. J. W. Rostha
 and R. Nachtk
np, Ath:
137. S. P Lu and P J. Prucnal, US 5744522 A (1998)
138. A. T. Chen, P: E. Kestyn and H. Zhao, US 6331582 B1 (2001)
141. U. M. Westhues, Pofyuref/t
148. R. D. Toker, N.K Apohan and M. V. Kahraman, Prog. Org. Coaf
76,1243(2013)
Recent trends in environmentally friendly water-borne polyurethane coatings: A review
182. M. Trollsas, J. Hedridk, D. Mecerreyes, R. Jerome and P: H. Dubois
J. Polym. Sci. Part A Polyst. 
, 36, 3187 (1998).
