Cite this: Polym. Chem., 2021, 12
009
Introduction
Polyurethane is one of the most widely used resins in the
current coatings field. According to the type of dispersion
medium, polyurethane coatings can be classified as solvent-
based polyurethane coatings or waterborme polyurethane
(WPU) coatings. With the increasing worldwide attention to
environmental protection, solvent-based polyurethane coatings
have been gradually replaced by WPU coatings. The early WPU
coatings in previous reviews from Noble? and Fiori² were
mainly one-component WPU coatings, which have engineering
advantages such as convenient usage and wide applications,
but also some poor physicochemical properties including poor
chemical resistance, hardness and mechanical properties. In
order to make up for these shortcomings, two-component
waterborne polyurethane (2K-WPU) coatings have been devel-
oped.? A 2K-WPU is composed of an aqueous hylroxyl com-
*College of Mevheical ond Efectricel Engix
ring. Bejueg LitinA
rsity ef Caem
Teclssology, Bejing r00029, Chine
J0008r, CAins. E-meil yinogaff.efu.cn
nte oy Tacfnoog, bejing
ity, Beging J00084, CRins
Eco-friendlyfunctionaltwo-componentflame-
retardantwaterbornepolyurethanecoatings:a
review
Xuan Yin, @ a,b Haosheng Pang,c Yunjun Luo  *b and Bing Zhang
pollution. Based on various synthesis designs, such as the use of different flame-retardlants and compo
sitions, 2K-FWPU can exhibit various functionalities in addition to excellent flame retardance. This reviev
introduces the components, performances, functionality, andl mechanism of 2K-FWPU coatings, which
are mainly based on different flame-retardant modihcations, in three sections: (1) their components
eosi pue (sjuepaeai-aej eoid jo sad) om) suauoduo xoipfy suepesaael apnlul um
nate components (three kinds of typical syntheses);: (2) a comparison summarizing the effects of the
flame-retardants and the synthesis method on the emulsion properties, mechanical. performance, wate
resistance, thermal properties, and flame retardance; and (3) functionalization and mechanisms, particu-
larly optical functionalization and thermal degradation/flame-retardance mechanisms. Current ZK-FWPL
aunbas Aqrjeuoqouny snouea Aysges osje fau μnq fouepaeqai auey panoudua) mous quo jou sfupeoo
ments. In future, the designs of 2KFWPU coatings wil significantly assist and guidle the potential dlevelop-
2K-WPU coatings have the advantages of both solvent-based
two-component polyurethanes and waterborne coatings, with
excellent mechanical properties, high thermal stability, low
toxicity, low volatile organics (VOCs), outstanding weather re-
sistance, and convenient storage and transportation,610 These
merits allow 2K-WPU coatings to satisfy the requirements for
extreme working conditions. Therefore, 2K-WPU coatings have
attracted worldwide attention from both the scientific and
industrial communities, and they have become a research
The applications of coatings mainly include building, tex-
tiles, woodware, leather, etc.; of these, textiles and woodwares
are highly flammable. Hence, the coatings applied in these
fields require flame-retardant properties. Two-component
flame-retardant waterborne polyurethane  (2K-FWPU) has
superior flame retardance, excellent mechanical properties
and thermal stability, meaning that it is able to meet the 
requirements of flame retardance. In addition to flame retar-
dance, versatile properties, such as luminescence, ultraviolet 
(UV) shielding and temperature sensitivity, are also required
for the coatings in these applied fields. Appropriate flame
retardants are required for improving the flame retardance of
materials, and suitable functional modifiers are also required
for achieving versatile properties in the materials. At present, 
organophosphorus flame retardants without halogen or tox-
icity have been initially applied in 2K-FWPU.14-17 This kind of
flame-retardants, which show excellent flame retardance and
satisfy environmental protection  concerns,
has partially
the research focus, Homever,research into multifunctional
replaced the previous halogenated flame-retardants to become
2K-FWPU is still in the early stages of development.
The
functionalization of halogen-free 2K-FWPU can improve its
comprehensive properties to meet various demands
for
dlifferent fields. To date, there are still some problems in the
field of 2K-FWPU: (i) the relevant research on the flame retar-
dance of 2K-WPU is extremely limited due to the usage of a
single flame-retardant; (i) the hydrophilicity of polyisocyanate
needs to be further improved in order to improve the perform-
ance of 2K-WPU; (i) 2K-WPU lacks functionality (e.g. tempera-
ture sensibility, UV shielding and luminescence), and thus
cannot meet the requirements of application fields based on
special backgrounds. Therefore, the development of functional
2K-FWPU with high flame retardant efficiency is of great
significance.
1950s,12° Around 1950, polyurethanes appeared in Europe as
Polyurethanes have been extensively studied since the
coating additives, but most of them were solvent-based poly-
urethane products. In 1953, DuPont Co., Ltd first synthesised
a polyurethane emulsion vie binary amine chain extension.
With the increasing attention of countries worldwide to
environmental protection, the application of solvent-based
polyurethane was strictly limited due to the emission of VOCs,
which accelerated the appearance of WPU. The development
of WPU was rapid after the 197os.。a In 1972, Bayer Co., Ltd first
used WPU in leather surface finishing, which drew the atten-
tion of researchers. The research and application of WPU had
a breakthrough in 1980s, and they were widely applied in
textile dyeing-finishing and processing. Europe, the United
States and Japan competed to develop WPU, which resulted in
many product series, such as the Impramil series of Bayer, the
Elastron series of DKS and the Imron series of DuPont. WPU is
a type of emulsion that uses water as a dispersion medium. Its
dispersion liquid contains little or no solvent, which results in
workability? Additionall, its viscosity and rheological pro-
low  toxicity, non-pollution, energy conservation and
furniture and building applications.21-2 Depending on the
perties are easily adjusted and controlled for textile, leather,
application area, these modified surfaces require different out-
standing applied properties. For instance, fabric WPU coatings
require high wear-resistance, water-resistance, and film-
forming properties, while wood WPU coatings require high
strength, rigidity and glossiness,a Aditionaly, flame-eta-
it prevents tetiles and wood from catching fire and presenting
dance is a vital property for fabric and wood WPU coatings, as
safety hazards t le an proerty1 Therefore, the evlp-
ment of flame-retardant WPU (FWPU) is of great significance
in terms of research and application prospects. The main com-
ponents of WPU/FWPU and 2K-WPU/2K-FWPU are shown in
Scheme 1.
adding mode 
and the
2K-FWPU
instinct-type FWPU. Although the preparation of blending-type
reaction type. First, FWPU is divided into blending-type and
FWPU is simple, e.g, physical blending, and good flame-retar-
dance is obtained, the method influences the stability and
grain size of the emulsion.4- Unlike blending-type FWPU,
instinct-type FWPU is synthesized via the incorporation of a
reactive flame-retardant with polyurethane chains. The flame-
qpdadndd jo aqnp pue oua supa
instinct-type preparation are higher and longer than that of
blending-type FWPU, respectively,7-* although the prepa-
ration is a complex technology. Instinct-type FWPU is com-
posed of flame-retardant units containing flame-retardant
elements and polyurethane chains, and is obtained by chemi-
cal reactions.*° The innovative instinct-type FWPU is realized
by modification at the molecular level, which overcomes the
interface incompatibility (e.g., volatilization, dissolution,
migration and exudation). Secondly, based on the component
type, FWPU can be divided into one-component FWPU,
2K-FWPU and intumescent FWPU.
One-component FWPU is composed of a combination of
soft and hard segments in the form of blocks, which act as a
matrix to participate in the synthesis reaction. The flame
retardant can be introduced into the soft segment, the hard
segment, or both at the same time. Because the preparation
process of one-component FWPU is simple and easy to
operate, and different molecular structures and functionalities
can be designed, it is currently the most-researched type of
FWPU. However, one-component FWPU also has some disad-
adhesion. Therefore, 2K-FWPU has gradually begun to replace
vantages, such as poor strength, rigidity, thermal stability, and
one-component FWPU in certain application fields. 2K-FWPU
and 2K-WPU have similar structures and properties. They
consist of two components, a water-based flame retardant
hydroxyl component and an isocyanate component. After the
two components are mixed, a 2K-FWPU is obtained. There are
three main reasons that 2K-FWPU can replace one-component
FWPU. First, the 2K-FWPU has high thermal stability, tensile
strength and hardness. Second, water-based hydroxyl com-
ponents with different molecular structures can easily be
designed using such materials, thereby providing the
2K-FWPU with versatility. Finally, the formulation of the iso-
cyanate component and the aqueous hydroxyl component
ratio is flexible. 2K-FWPUs can be prepared with different pro-
perties according to the actual needs. 2K-FWPU prepared
using a reactive soft-segment flame-retardant modifier has
greater advantages in flame-retardant performance, thermal
stability and application performance. 2K-FWPU can overcome
the disadvantages of one-component FWPU, and further
expand the application fields of FWPU.
Components
Flame-retardant hydroxyl component
The hydroxyl component of waterborne flame retardants is
-p *pofjod asafjod 1o pofjod 1oajod uo paedaad Aensn
socyanate, a reactive flame retardant, a hydrophilic chain
extender and an alkaline neutralizer, The synthesis method is
similar to that of one-component FWPU, except that the end-
group is hydroxyl, and the stoichiometric ratio of the isocya-
ensn zt0°t ueq sa[ s (aneA ) xoupq o dnor8 aeu
polyether polyol or polyester polyol is reacted with disocyanate
first, the reactive flame retardant is added to continue the reac-
tion, and then the hydrophilic chain extender and alkaline
neutralization are used to obtain the flame retardant water-
borne hydroxyl component. The water-borne hydroxyl com-
ponent is the most variable component in 2K-WPU, and deter-
mines the properties of the 2K-WPU. Modification of the
intrinsic flame retardant of WPU includes soft segment flame
retardant modification and hard segment flame retardant
modification. A high content of flame retardant elements is
obtained in 2K-FWPU using the soft segment flame retardant 
modification method. 2K-FWPU obtained by the hard segment
flame retardant modification method has not only good flame
Soft molecular chain segment-based modifiers. We* modi-
fied the halogen-free soft segment flame retardant modifier
polyphosphate (OP550) to synthesize soft segment flame
retardant hydroxyl components with different OP550 contents
(OFPUD). We used MHP1s** polyisocyanate curing agent and
-uoo aeuesost a se qua8e Suuno ageueAsospjod ,pV-ZIN
ponents to synthesize OFWPU and OGWPU, respectively. We
investigated the influence of the OP550 content on the struc-
ture and performance of the hydroxyl component and the two-
component system. The following results were obtained: (i)
When the OP550 content is 15%, the particle size of the emul-
sion is 36.0 nm, the viscosity is 22.4 mPa s, and the zeta poten-
tial of the emulsion is 40.6 mV. There is no precipitation
after high-speed centrifugation, and the emulsion
canbe
used as the aqueous hydroxyl component of the OGWPU
system. (i) We used MHP15 and OFPUD to prepare and syn-
thesize OFWPU with different OP550 contents. When the
OP550 content is 15% (this sample is named OFPUD-15), the
limiting oxygen index (LO1) can reach 28.6%, the UL-94 rating
is V-0, and the emulsion has good stability. (i) We prepared
OGWPU with different R values by mixing M12-A4 and
OFPUD-15. When the R value is greater than 1.4, the LOI of
OGWPU is above 28.0%, and the UL-94 results are all
V-0 grades, indicating flame-retardant materials that have
N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)aminomethylene
(Fyrol 6) as the hard segment flame retardant modifier for the
diethyl
phosphate
hydroxyl component for a modified water dispersion. We used
-ospjod ,pV-ZIN pue qua8e Suuno aeueoosjod sSIdHN
cyanate curing agent as the isocyanate components. By adljust-
ing the content of Fyrol 6 and the amount of polyisocyanate
curing agent, we studied the preparation and performance of
2K-FWPU. Through experiments, we found the following
phenomena: (i) When the content of Fyrol 6 is 15% (this
sample is named FFPUD-15), the particle size of the emulsion
is 124.8 nm, the viscosity is 19.4 mPa s, and the zeta potential
of the emulsion is 30.2 mV. It is a stable emulsion and can
be used as the aqueous hydroxyl component of the FGWPU
system. (i) FFWPU with different Fyrol 6 contents was pre-
pared using MHP15 and FFPUD. It was found that when the
Fyrol 6 content was 15%, the LOI could reach 27.8%, and the
UL-94 rating was V-0. (i) FGWPUs with different R values were
prepared using M12-A4 and FFPUD-15. It was found that when
the R value is greater than 1.4, the LOI of the FGWPU is above
28.0%, and the UL-94 results are all V-0, which is difficult to
achieve. It is a combustible material with good flame retardant 
properties.
Isocyanatecomponent
t Supnponu ao aeueioosjjqod auq on 1agsjnua ue Suppy
hydrophilic group into the molecular chain can cause the poly-
isocyanate to disperse uniformly in water to form a stable
emulsion. There are two main methods for the hydrophilic
modification of polyisocyanates, the physical method and
chemical method. The physical method is called the external
emulsification method, and involves adding the emulsifier to
the polyisocyanate monomer. The process requirements are
not high, but it has an obvious disadvantage. After curing into
a film, there will be unreacted curing agent floating on the
surface, redlucing the hydrophilicity of the curing agent and
water resistance of the coating film. Therefore, chemical
methods, that is, the introduction of hydrophilic groups into
the molecular chains of the polyisocyanate monomers, are
more popular. This method is also called internal emulsifica-
tion. The chemical modification methods for water-dispersed
fqod s suo sad omq opu papap fueu aue saeueoosjod
ether modification and the other is sulfonate modification.
pod fq pagpou fjeoudoupiq suale Suuno ajeueiospjod
agents, which are also known as non-ionic polyisocyanate
curing agents., There are non-ionic ethyleneoxy groups in the 
molecular structure of polyether organics. The ethyleneoxy
groups have good hydrophilicity and are beneficial to the dis-
persion of polyisocyanates in water. Polyisocyanate curing
agents modified by sulfonate are called polyether polyisocya-
nate curing agents, which are also known as ionic polyisocya-
nate curing agents. Sulfonate ions have strong hydrophilicity
and can improve the water dispersibility of the polyisocyanate
fpa poq seq ua8e Buμno aeueoospod ou J uae uμns
leneoxy groups and sulfonate groups in its structure, it can
exhibit not only low viscosity and good water dispersibility, but
also non-ionic polyisocyanate curing. The agent shows a long
pot life. However, there have not been reports of hybrid polyi-
socyanate curing agents.
ublished on 06 September 2021. Dowmloaded by Shanghai Jiaotong University on 9/25/2022 5:07:17 PM
component of 2K-WPU, and is formed by uniformly dispersing
u sdnog supig qm yuae Suno aeuiosod a
water. The polyisocyanate curing agent has only six-membered
nitrogen-containing heterocycles, carbon chains and isocya-
nate groups in its molecular chain. The six-membered nitro-
gen-containing heterocycles and carbon chains have strong
hydrophobicity, and the isocyanate groups will react with
water. If appropriate hydrophilic groups are added to the mole-
cular chain, it will not only facilitate the dispersion of the poly-
isocyanate curing agent in water, but also inhibit the reaction
of the isocyanate groups with water. The hydrophilic modifi-
cation of polyisocyanate curing agents is usually performed
using a chemical method, that is, the introduction of hydro-
philic groups into the polyisocyanate molecular chain; this
method is also called the intermal emulsification method. A
polyisocyanate curing agent prepared by the internal emulsifi-
cation method not only has the characteristics of good compat-
ibility, fast drying, low odor, low viscosity, etc., but can also
slow the failure rate of the isocyanate group when dispersed in
water, and is suitable for use as a two-component curing agent
for water-based coatings. Two-component water-based paints
prepared using the above polyisocyanate curing agent can be
used for wood coatings, flexible coatings, metal coatings, and
automotive mid-top paint coatings.
Polyether-based modifiers. In 1993, Jacobs broke the barrier
that polyisocyanate could not be hydrophilic. He found that
when the hexamethylene disocyanate (HD1) trimer was modi-
fied with polyethylene glycol monomethyl ether with a mole-
cular weight between 120 and 1040, the modified HDI trimer
had good water dispersion. The first generation of water-based
HDI curing agents was generated by the reaction of monohy-
droxypolyether and HDI trimer. The structure of the first gene-
ration of waterborne HDI curing agents is shown in Fig. 1a.
Bayer has made continuous progress in this respect. Based on
the first generation of water-based HDIs, the synthesis process
was improved to obtain the second generation of water-based
HDI curing agents, and the formula of the second generation
of water-based HDI curing agents is shown in Fig. 1b. The
content of hydrophilic groups decreased and the number of
NCO groups increased, and the film performance of the
second generation water-dispersible curing agent was close to
ags t se suase Suns au suale Suno puaos jo te
storage period of more than 90 days. The excellent coating
material can be obtained by the simple proportion of amine
Fig. 1
with other components after neutralization. In recent years,
Chinese researchers have made breakthroughs in polyether-
-sp-iaem sapajod amou v suale Surno aqsaadsp-raem ad
persible curing agent was prepared by the Qu group of South
China University of Technology.4" The dispersion curing agent 
was prepared from HDI trimer, 2,2-dihydroxymethyl butyric
acid, polyethylene glycol monomethyl ether and 1,4-cyclo-
hexane dimethylmethanol (CHDM). When the molar ratio of
dimethylolbutanoic acid (DMBA)/MPEG/CHDM is 3 : 7 : 3, the
2K-WPU cured with this curing agent has high hardness, high
water resistance, and excellent apparent properties and
glossiness.
Sulphonate-based modifiers. Compared with polyether type
water-dispersible curing agents, films cured with sulfonic-acid-
type water-dispersible curing agent have more durable water re-
sistance. The preparation method involves dispersing HDI
trimer in water by neutralizing isocyanate with triethylamine
(TEA). In 1996, Haberle began to use hydroxyethyl sulfonic
acid grafting to modify polyisocyanate to prepare sulfonic-acid-
type water-dispersible curing agents that can be easily dis-
persed in water or coatings. In particular, the prepared
2K-WPU has low viscosity and strong water resistance.
However, the compatibility between the sulfonate group and
traditional curing agent is poor. Subsequently, Bayer’s Laas
used zwitterionic biological buffer to neutralize sulfonate to
modify the HDl trimer, allowing the sulfonic waterborne
polymer to be stably dispersed in water and stored for a long
time. The structural formula of the third generation of water-
borne HDI curing agents is shown in Fig. 2c. The 2K-WPU film
 2017 Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany
nisms of M type, A type, and MA type polyiso-
cured with this curing agent has high hardness and good
chemical resistance. By adding sulfonate to modify HDI
trimer, the thermal stability, tensile strength and water resis-
tance of the FWPU film were improved. Introducing hydro-
philic groups into the polyisocyanate molecular chain
through chemical modification is the main method to
prepare waterborne HDI curing agents. The most commonly
used polymer containing hydrophilic groups is polyethylene
glycol monomethyl ether. The ethyleneoxy structural unit
(CH,CHO) in the structure is hydrophilic. The ethoxy
structural unit can be introduced into the molecular chain of
polyisocyanate by the reaetion of the hydroxyl end group of
polyethylene glycol monomethyl ether with the isocyanate
group of polyisocyanate. The most commonly used sulfonate
modifier is sulfamate, and polyisocyanate modified by sulfa-
mate has good water dispersibility. The data in Table 1 shows
HDI curing agents
a performance comparison of the third-generation curing
agents. As shown in Table 1, the third-generation water-dis-
film impact strength.
Polyether-sulphonate based modifiers. At pres
commonly used polyisocyanate trimers are the HDI trimer and
sent, the most
isophorone disocyanate (IPDI) trimer.* In terms of polyiso-
cyanate curing agents, Bayer company has prepared three gen-
uoj-uou Supnous rsquale Suuno ageueoosjod jo suoea
and ionic-types.2 Zhai and Wang also successfully prepared
non-ionic and ionic water-dispersible curing agents,46,71 In the
preparation of non-ionic polyisocyanate curing agents, poly-
ethylene glycol monoether is the most commonly used non-
ionic hydrophilic modifier, and its structure is hydrophilic.**
In the preparation of ionic polyisocyanate curing agents,
amino salts containing an ionic hydrophilic sulfonic group are
often used as ionic hydrophilic modifiers. The dispersibility of
polyisocyanate in water can be greatly improved after modifi-
cation. If there are both non-ionic hydrophilic segments and
ionic hydrophilic groups in the structure of a polyisocyanate
curing agent, f.e., if it is a mixed polyisocyanate curing agent,
the polyisocyanate curing agent can have not only the low vis-
cosity and good water-dispersibility of an ionic polyisocyanate
curing agent, but also the long storage life of a non-ionic polyi-
socyanate curing agent, and the emulsion properties, thermal
stability and mechanical properties of 2K-WPU can be further
improved.
dispersibility and low viscosity, we** designed and prepared a
non-ionic (M-type) polyisocyanate curing agent, an ionic type
VW) adk paxu e pue *uale Suuno aqeueisospfjod (ad6 v)
saadosd pue anonns aq suale Suuno aeuioosjod ad
of the three polyisocyanate curing agents and their emulsions
were characterized, as shown in Fig. 2. This laid a foundation
for the preparation of two-component flame retardant water-
borme polyurethanes. (i) The M polyisocyanate curing agent
was synthesized from MPEG and HDI trimers. It was found
that when the methoxypolyethylene glycol (MPEG) content was
between 12% and 20%, the storage period of the M-type polyi-
socyanate curing agent could reach 168 days, and the NCO
content was more than 15.3%. The emulsion had good stabi-
lity and the application period could reach 6 hours. (i) A polyi-
socyanate curing agent was synthesized from sodium ethylene-
diamine ethanesulfonate (AAS salt) and HDI trimer. It was
found that when the AAS salt content was between 4% and
6%, the content of NCO was more than 17.5%, the particle
size of the emulsion was less than 17 nm, the viscosity was
less than 128 mPa s, and the emulsion had good stability. (i)
The M-A polyisocyanate curing agent was synthesized from
MPEG, AAS salt and HDI trimer. It was found that the content
of MPEG was between 12% and 15%, and the content of AAS
salt was 2% to 6%, The NCO content was more than 15.9%,
the storage period was 112 days, the emulsion viscosity was
less than 90 mPa s, the emulsion stability was good, and the
emulsion application period could reach 6 hours.
Comparison
To further understand the effects of curing agents and flame
retardants on the properties of 2K-FWPU, OFWPU-15,
FFWPU-15, OGWPU-1.4, OGWPU-1.6 and FGWPU-1.6 were
selected as four kinds of 2K-FWPU (Table 2).
Emulsion propertes
OGWPU-1.4 has the smallst particle size and the greatest
absolute zeta potential value (Table 3). The
SO,H group of M12-A4 is smaller than that of the
volum
ofthe
group, which has a smaller infuence on chain movement.
OCH
Aditionally, SO,H enhances the electrostatic repulsion of the
emulsion double
ran Edward force
Table 2 Compositions  of OFWPU-15,  FFWPU-15,  OGWPU-1.4,
OGWPU-1.6, and FGWPU-1.644,45
among particles, preventing them from condensing.d The par-
ticle size and zeta potential of OFWPU-15 are smaller than
those of FFWPU-15. Similar results can be found between
OGWPU-1.6 and FGWPU-1.6. Compared to Fyrol 6, larger
numbers of polyether soft segments and smaller size OCH,
groups are found in the OP550 structural units, which
improve the flexibility of the molecular chain, reduce the par-
ticle size and improve the emulsion stability,
Mechanical properties
Compared with OFWPU-15, the tensile strength of OGWPU-1.4
is increased by 53%, and the elongation at break is increased
by 44.5% (Table 4). Firstly, the SO,H group of M12-A4 is
shorter than the long ether chain. The barrier is higher and
the internal rotation conformations are fewer, which increases 
the chain rigidity and tensile strength. Secondly, SOH
increases the Coulomb forces and intermolecular forces
between COOH and molecular chains to reduce chain entan-
glement. Meanwhile, the tensile strength of FFWPU-15 was
higher than that of OFWPU-15. Similar results were found
between OGWPU-1.6 and FGWPU-1.6 due to the enhanced
interaction of the Fyrol 6 hard segments.
Watetresistance
The water resistance of OGWPU-1.4 is much higher than that
of OFWPU-15 (Table 4). Firstly, SO,H overcomes the water re-
sistance deficiency of carboxylic WPU. Secondly, the combi-
nation of carboxylic, sulfonate and non-ionic hydrophilic
groups improves the synthesis stability of 2K-WPU.
Additionally, 2K-WPU film modified by OP550 has worse water
resistance because of the many hydrophilic OCHs, groups.
Thermal properties
Comparing the DSC results of OGWPU-1.4 and OFWPU-15,
there is little difference in the degradation temperature of the
soft segment (7g), the degradation temperature of the hard
segment (7g) and the temperature difference between the Tgh
and Tg (T,) (Table 5). SO,H has little effect on microphase
separation. Additionally, the T Tg and T, of FFWPU-15 are
higher than those OFWPU-15. Similar results can be found
between OGWPU-1.6 and FGWPU-1.6. Fyrol 6 enhances the
aggregation of the hard segments and microphase separation.
The maximum decomposition peak temperature of the hard
segment (Tmax) and soft segment (7ma2) of OGWPU-1.4 are
lower, and the maximum decomposition rate of the hard
segment (Vmxs) and soft segment (Va2) are higher than
those of OFWPU-15 based upon the TGA results. The bond
energy of S—O is lower than that of the CC bond, which leads
to the thermal decomposition of SO,H and a shorter time to
reach Tm.- Additionally, SO,H is decomposed into SO, accel-
erating thermal decomposition. Additionally, FFWPU-15 has a
higher Vmaxs and smaller Vmao than OFWPU-15. Similar
results can be found between OGWPU-1.6 and FGWPU-1.6.
Fyrol 6 makes phosphoric acid and metaphosphoric acid more
effective in catalytic decomposition.
Flameretardance
OGWPU-1.4 has higher a LOI and lower carbon residue than
OFWPU-15 (Table 6). M12-A4 exhibits polyether-sulphonate (P-
S) synergistic flame-retardance with OP550 during combustion.
SOH reduces the carbon chain proportion and accelerates the
carbon formation rate, but SOH also accelerates the heat. The
heat causes SO;H to promote thermal decomposition more
than char formation. OFWPU-15 has a higher LOI and lower
carbon residue than FFWPU-15. Similar results can be found
between OGWPU-1.6 and FGWPU-1.6. OP550 generates more
polyphosphoric acid and polymetaphosphoric acid, thereby iso-
Iating oygen and inhibiting combustion.
Functionalizationandmechanisms
Functionalization
With the advancement of technology and the improvement of
living standards, the requirements for the appearance of coat-
ings have also increased. With its excellent physical and
value in textiles, woodware and other fields,,S However, so
chemical properties, 2K-FWPU has important application
far, there are almost no reports on the modification of the
appearance and funetionality of 2K-FWPU, Water-based coat-
ings with fluorescent properties can be used not only as
marking materials, but also as temperature-sensitive lumines-
cent functional materials, which have huge potential appli-
cation value.12,3s There are two methods for the fluorescence
and the chemical method,s-57 Each method has its own
modification of waterborne polyurethane: the physical method
advantages and disadvantages. When 2K-FWPU is endowed
with fluorescence through physical methods, there are limit-
ations related to fluorescence quenching and fluorescence
stability. Therefore, small reactive molecules with an organic
conjugate structure have been selected as fluorescence agents,
and chemical methods have been used to weaken the fluo-
rescence quenching of the fluorescent waterborme poly-
urethane and increase its luminescence ability.S-61
Organic
conjugated structural units not only exhibit high luminous
efficiency and a wide range of luminous colors, but also have
relatively simple use conditions, high color purity, flexible
adljustability and good luminous stability.“*
We prepared a 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene-modified water-
based flame-retardant hydroxy component (NOPUD) and its
2K-FWPU (NOWPU), and studied the emulsion performance of
contents,a,s1 The influence of adjusting the solvent polarity,
OGWPU-1.6with
dlifferent
1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene
temperature, emulsion concentration and storage time on the
fluorescence intensity of the membrane were studied to lay the
foundations for its application. Our research had the following
findings: (i) As the content of 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene
increases, the particle size of the emulsion increases, the vis-
cosity decreases, and the emulsion stability is good. The emul-
sion can be used as the aqueous hyclroxyl component of the
NOWPU system. (i) When the content of 1,5-dihydroxy-
naphthalene is 1.0% (this sample is named NOPUD-1.0), the
fluorescence intensity of NOPUD is the strongest; when the
concentration is 10 g mL*, the fluorescence intensity is the 
strongest; with increasing storage time, the fluorescence stabi-
lity of NOPUD is good, and the fluorescence half-life reaches
109 days. (i) As the content of 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene
increases, the particle size of the emulsion increases, the vis-
cosity decreases, and the stability of the emulsion is good;
when the content of 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene is ≥0.5%, the
LOI is above 29.0%, the UL-94 result is V-0, the tensile strength
reaches 25.2 MPa, and the coating film hardness reaches 3H.
(iv) When the content of 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene is 1.0%
(this sample is named NOWPU-1.o), the fluorescence intensity
of NOWPU is the largest; NOWPU is insensitive to solvent
polarity and sensitive to temperature; when the concentration
is 10? g mL~, the fluorescence intensity of NOWPU is
maximum; as the storage time inereases, the fluorescence
stability is good, and the fluorescence half-life reaches 145
days. (v) When 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene is decomposed by
heat, an expanded carbon layer is formed to isolate heat trans-
fer, inhibit combustion, and exhibit a flame retardant effect.
The fluorescence applications are displayed in Fig, 3 and 4.
to reduce the transmittance of UV by absorbing or reflecting
UV. Generally, 2K-WPUs are coatings with high gloss and have
basically no shielding effect on UV rays. However, in certain
specific environments, such as when textile materials or
wooden furniture is used outdloors, the coatings applied on
the surface can shield UV or reflect natural light. Based on its
wavelength, UV light is divided into the short-wave region
(190280 nm), medium-wave region (280320 nm) and long-
wave region [320400 nm). The UV rays in the medium-wave
and long-wave regions are more harmful to the human body,
and wood and other materials are prone to lignin degradation
under UV light in the short-wave and medium-wave regions,
which willdamage the wood. When the human body or wood-
ware is exposed to UV, a 2K-WPU coated on the surface of the
fabric or woodware that does not have the function of shield-
Fig. 3 Photographs of various materials coated with NOPUD-1.0 under
wencUnTt
room light and UV. a = 365 nm. (a) The left BIT was written on non
woven fabric  with NOPUD without
(NOPUD-0). (b) Nonwoven fabric samples without words. (cf) Four
1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene
materials have been written on with a ballpoint pen. Three states are
show
wn for each material: the uncoated material, the material coo
with
Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE part of Springer Nature
Fig. 4  Coating films irradiated by UV and natural light: (a) NOWPU-0.5
and (b) NOWPU-1.0.° 2017 MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
ing UV rays or refecting natural light cannot meet the require-
ments for protecting the human body or woodware.6
At
present, because the research progress in 2K-WPU is slower
than that in one-component water-based polyurethanes, and
there is less research on the functionality of 2K-WPU, there is
paseq-apem puauoduoo-omq Supuelau uogeuopu ap fuan
polyurethanes that can shield UV rays or reflect the UV rays in
natural light to reduce gloss Therefore, in order to meet the
requirements of textile materials or wood furniture for shield-
ing UV rays or having low gloss, it is highly necessary to
improve the light shielding performance of 2K-FWPU.
Nano-TiO, has not only good light resistance, chemical re-
sistance and environmental friendliness, but also the charac-
teristics of whiteness and different transparency. Its most pro-
minent advantages are its anti-UV performance and strong
rigidity.° Additionally, anatase nano-TiO has a wide energy
stabilizer and inhibit photooxidants69Aditionaly, the
band gap and catalytic activity, and can be used as an efficient
anatase-type hydrophilic nano-TiO2 particles are spherical,
and after strong stirring, they can be dispersed well in a one-
component WPU
Jemulsion without agglomeration.67
Therefore, the introduction of hydrophilic nano-TiO into
2K-WPU to prepare a 2K-FWPU with light shielding perform-
ance has potential application value, We9,50°
paredard
2K-FWPU modified with hydrophilic nano-TiO (TOWPU),
studied the influence of adljusting the pH value, temperature
 pue aread upas s au to an aes pue
shielding effciency, and carried out structure and perform-
ance tests. The study had the following findings: (i) With
increasing hydrophilic nano-TiO- content, the UV transmit-
tance decreases and the gloss decreases; in an alkaline
environment, the UV shielding efficiency and the UV shielding
effect are stronger, and can reach 100% and 0% respectively.
As the storage time increases, it can slow the increase in UV
transmittance and gloss (Fig. 5). (i) When the content of
hydrophilic nano-TiO, is 0.5% (this sample is named
TOWPU-0.5), the tensile strength of the film is 22.3 MPa, and
the pencil hardness is 2H. (ii Hydrophilic nano-TiO will
react with NCO to form a cross-linked network structure,
which improves the thermal stability of the system,
reduces the rate of thermal decomposition, and inhibits
thermal decomposition; during combustion, the hydrophilic
nano-TiO; deposits on and coats the surface of the carbon
residue to isolate heat transfer, and SO, phosphoric acid,
metaphosphoric acid and polycondensate have a gas-conden-
sation phase synergistic flame retardant effect (Fig. 6). In our
previous work, we balanced the UV shielding and photodegra-
dation of nano-TiO, mainly by regulating the amount
aded.49,52 Ssince only 2.0% hydrophilic nano-TiO, relative to
the prepolymer mass was added, the photodegradation was
weak in this case.
PS synergistie mechanism
According to the analysis of gas-phase TGA-FTIR and con
dlensecl-phase
FTIR
preW
works,
Fig. 5 Optical shielding performances of emulsions and spun films
after various storage times. (a) Curves of the change in ultraviolet-light
transmittance for the TOWPU0 and TOWPU-0.5 emulsions. (b) 60°*
glossiness curves of the TOWPU-0 and TOWPU-0.5 spun films. (c)
Visible-light transmittance curves or TOwPU-0 and TOWPU-0.5 spun
fitting: the Gaussian fitting is presented as light red colored curves.*
films. The variations in the points in the plots were fitted using Gaussian
2021 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Nd L1:00:s 220g/92/6 0o rss50 3uosoer rqaurgs Aq popromwog '120g sqotdog 90 to poustqnd
Fig. 6 The flame retardance of matte film. FTIR spectra of pyrolysis gas
at 10 *C min~ warming. Images of char residues of TOWPU-0 and
of Chemistry-
TOWPU0.5 shot after being tested in air at 500 *C.*? 2021 Royal Society
thermal degradation/flame-retardance mechanism based
PS synergism is proposed
ether soft segments, TEA and CO, at 180245 °C, as shown in
Scheme 2.
Thermal decomposition of OP550 and SO,H. The thermal
degradation of phosphate ester in OP550 occurs first, and the
thermal decomposition produces phosphoric acid and meta-
phosphoric acid (Scheme 3). Then, the thermal decomposition
of SO,H in the polyisocyanate curing agent occurs to generate
SO, HCN, NH, CO, and other gases in order to dilute O, and
other flammable gases. The second thermal decomposition
occurs at 245324 °C. There are small molecules including
ketones, aldehydes, ethers, phosphoric acid, metaphosphoric
acid, polyether soft segments, and urethane hard segments.
Scheme 4 shows the thermal degradation of sulfonic acid
uale Suuno aeue(xosjod a ul sdno18
ments of the water-based hydroxyl component (Scheme 5) and
cross-linked segments (Scheme 6) are thermally decomposed
to generate polyether soft segments, isocyanate, and HCN,
NHs, CO, and other gases, which occurs at 324391 °C. The
phosphoric acid and metaphosphoric acid generated in the
second stage will delay the decomposition of hard segments,
generate polyether soft segments and release CO, HCN, NH,
and other incombustible gases in order to dilute O and other
Scheme 3  Thermal decomposition of the phosphate ester in OP550
isocyanate curing agent
Scheme 6  Thermal decomposition of cross-linked segments
flammable gases; at the same time, phosphoric acid and meta-
phosphoric acid are heat-dehydrogenated to give  polypho-
sphoric acidandcondensed
polymetaphosphoric
(Scheme 7), There are small molecules including ketones, alde-
hydes, ethers, and polyphosphoric acid, polymetaphosphoric
acid, and polyether soft segments in the residue.
Thermal decomposition of soft segments. Under the cataly-
sis of polyphosphoric acid and polymetaphosphoric acid, soft
segments are first decomposed to form small-molecule com-
pounds such as aldehydes, ketones, ethers, H;O, and CO, at
391480 °C. The soft segments then sequentially undergo
thermal decomposition to be dehydrated and finally carbo-
nized into carbon. The composition of the residue includes
only polyphosphoric acid, polymetaphosphorie acid and a
carbon layer. The detailed process is shown in Schemes 812.
metaphosphoric acid
Scheme 10  Production of small-molecule aldehydes and ketones
Scheme 11  Production of small-molecule ether
Scheme 12  Process of charring
Conclusions
2K-FWPU not only exhibits good flame-retardance 　and
mechanical properties, but it also has the advantages of being
environmentally friendly, having low toxicity, and creating no
pollution. At present, although 2K-FWPU and even 2K-WPU
have been less researched, 2K-FWPU is gradually replacing
one-component FWPU in the fields of textiles, woodware, auto-
mobiles, and related applications. This is based on in-depth
research into phosphorus-based modified 2K-FWPU. In order
to better expand the applications, in the next stage, we could
use different flame-retardant modification methods and physi-
cal or chemical methods to modify the dual components of
FWPU to provide more functionalities. (i) In terms of modif-
cation of the flame retardant, we can try to modify two-com-
ponent polyurethane with a sof-segment flame-retardant
modifier and a hard-segment flame-retardant modifier to
balance the mechanical properties and flame-retardant pro-
perties. (i) This could endow 2K-FWPU with more functional-
ities, such as anti-corrosion, super-hydrophobic, bio-antibac-
terial, and bio-degradable properties to meet the needs of a
wider range of applications. (ii) The initial decomposition
temperature of 2K-FWPU is relatively low. The thermal stability
of 2K-FWPU could be improved vin adding a matrix containing
fluorine and rigid macrocycles to make up for the lack of
thermal stability,
Conflictsofinterest
There are no conflicts to declare
Acknowledgements
This  work  is funded by the  National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 51905295, Talent
Introduction Program of BUCT under Grant No. buctrc202101,
and the National Key Research and Development Program of
China under Grant No. 2016YFC0204400.
Published on 06 September 2021. Downloaded by Shanghai Jiaotong University on 9/25/2022 5:07:17 PM.
29 U, von Pidoll, IEEE Trars. Ind. Appl., 2008, 44, 1519.
30 Y. Tang, D.-Y. Wang,
X-K. Jing, X.-G. Ge, B. Yang anc
a and S. Ito, Colloid Polymt. Sci. 2004, 283, 731737.
49 X. Yin and Y. Luo, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 1269612702.
50 X Yin and Y. Luo, Cofloid Polym. Sci., 2021, 299, 845853.
51 X. Yin, X. Li and Y. Luo, Polymters, 2017, 9, 492506.
52 X. Yin, C. Dong, C. Chai and Y. Luo, Prog. Org Coef., 2018,
 L1:20:s c20g/sz/6 uo Aarssanru, Suogoeyg rqurgg Aq poproqumog 170g saquadog 90 uo poustqnd
65 H. Huang, Z. Qiu, T. Han, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam ano
, 2017, 6, 13521356.
