TheinfluenceoftheNco/oHratioandthe1,6-hexanediol/
dimethylolpropionicacidmolarratioonthepropertiesof
waterbornepolyurethanedispersionsbasedon
1,5-pentamethylenedlisocyanate
Jiao Feng', Qiuhao Lu',Weiming Tan*, Kequan Chen ()',Pingkai Ouyang
1 State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech
University, Nanjing 211816, China
oiuru ~pr *o aynsug mssa nsnpug sugro pue ued noszueu Doon 'suo nog ou qurosay uuoudug peuogen Z
213016, China
Abstract 1,5-Pentamethylene disocyanate, a novel ali-
phatic disocyanate formed from bio-based 1,5-penta-
methylenediamine, has been used as a hard segmented
material to synthesize polyurethane. In this study, several
waterbome polyurethane (WPU) dispersions have been
-°1 og ssod oodd e q pedrd gssons
pentamethylene disocyanate poly(polyether) with differ-
ent NCO/OH ratios and 1,6-hexanediol (HDO)/dimethylol
propionic acid (DMPA) molar ratios. The Fourier trans-
form infrared (FTIR) spectra, thermogravimetric analysis,
differential scanning calorimetry, X-ray diffraction, and a
mechanical tensile test were used to investigate the
structures, thermal stability, phase separation, crystallinity,
mechanical properties, and adhesive performance of the
WPU dispersions. The FTIR results indicate that the
degree of hydrogen bonding and the numbers of urea
groups increase as the NCO/OH ratio and HDO/DMPA
molar ratio increase. Furthermore, the phase separation
increases and the thermal stability decreases as the
NCO/OH ratio increases or the HDO/DMPA molar
ratio decreases. Finally, WPU3.0-2.4 (NCO/OH =3,
HDO/DMPA = 2.4) exhibits a maximum tensile strength
and shear strength, pointing to its possible use as an
adhesive. These results could provide a very valuable
reference for industrial applications of WPU.
Keywords
1,5-pentamethylene disocyanate, polyur-
ethane, water based
Received March 9, 2018; accepted July 3, 2018
E-mail: kqchen(ainjtech.edu.cn
Introduction
Polyurethanes (PUs) have become one of the most
important and versatile polymers because of their excel-
lent mechanical strength, fexibility, damping ability, adhe-
siveness, and suitable curing rates [1,2]. Hence, PUs have
been widely applied in coatings, adhesives, medicinal
products, foams, paints, ink binders, and biomaterials
[39] since their discovery in 1937 [10]. However, the
main drawbacks restricting the development of PUs are
environmental pollution and the depletion of petroleum
raw materials [11,12]. Petroleum resources are the main
raw materials used in the traditional preparation of PUs,
which produces volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and
o ssn s  a] siosns oxo o
sustainable development, the eco-friendly polyurethane
alternatives have received ever-increasing attention [13
15]. Manufacture of waterborne PU (WPU), as an
alternative to the solvent-based type, is associated with
reduced VOCs and manufacturing costs as water is a safe,
nontoxic and inexpensive solvent [1618].
containing organic units and urethane linkages (NHCOO)
[19]. Generally, WPU can be prepared via the reaction
between disocyanate (containing isocyanates (NCO)) and
water-based polyols (containing active hydroxyl groups
(OH), which are referred to as a rigid hard segment and a
flexible soft segment, respectively. A chain extender such
as 1,4-butanediol or ethylene diamine is then used to
improve the properties of the polymer [4,11]. For many
years, researchers have been studying the preparation and
properties of WPU as they are impacted by various factors
such as the chemical structure, compositional variation,
contents of diisocyanates or polyols, neutralizing agents,
and block length [4,2023]. Among these factors, the hard
segment substantially affects the performance of the WPU
because of its high polarity and high solubility [24]. In
previous research, the main disocyanates used include
toluene disocyanate, 4,4'-diphenylmethane disocyanate,
1,6-hexamethylene disocyanate (HDI), isophorone diso-
cyanate, tetramethylxylylene disocyanate, and so on
[4,2527]. It has been reported that WPUs synthesized
from aliphatic disocyanates exhibit a higher mechanical
strength than those synthesized from cycloaliphatic and
aromatic disocyanates [28]. Recently, 1,5-pentamethylene
disocyanate (PDI), an aliphatic disocyanate, has been
produced by phosgenating 1,5-pentamethylenediamine
(PCA) [29]. PDI is similar to HDI in its physical and
chemical properties, but the use of PDI as a hard segment
would require lower consumption during the WPU synth-
esis because it has a higher proportion of isocyanate than
HDL. In addition, PCA can be obtained by eco-friendly
biochemical methods such as fermentation and enzymatic
methods. However, few studies have been reported on the
synthesis and characterization of PDI-based WPU; only a
few studies suggested the methods for producing PCA and
PDI, and the feasibility of synthetic PU resin [29]. But
these studies focused on solvent-based PU, and there have
been no detailed report on the effects of PDI, the NCO/OH
ratio and 1,6-hexanediol (HDO)/dimethylol propionic acid
(DMPA) molar ratios
Herein, we report the synthesis of WPU dispersions by
using PDI as a hard segment, and the influence of the
NCO/OH ratio and the HDO/DMPA molar ratio on the
properties of WPU. These data could provide a very
valuable reference for the industrial application of WPU
dispersions.
PDI was produced by Jiangsu Kuaida Agrochemical Co.,
ether 210 (N201, Mn = 1000±50, industrial grade, Tianjin
Ltd. (Jiangsu, China) using the phosgene method. Poly-
Petrochemical Plant, Tianjin, China) was dried in a
vacuum oven at 120°C for 2 h before use. DMPA,
dibutyltin dilaurate (DBTDL), N,N-dimethylformamide
(DMF), triethylamine (TEA), acetone, 1,6-hexanediol
(HDO), and deionized water were purchased from local
companies and used as received.
2.2 Synthesis of WPU disperston
Each WPU dispersion was prepared in a dry round bottom,
four-nccked flask (500 mL) cquipped with a mechanical
stirrer, a thermometer, a condenser, and an argon inlet.
Firstly, PDI and N210 were added to the flask placcd in an
oil bath (80°C). The NCO-terminated prepolymers were
obtained by nucleophilic addition of the active hydroxyl
groups of the N210 to the isocyanate group of the PDI
under an argon atmosphere with a moderate stirring rate
(150200 r/min) for about 2 h. Next, a certain amount of
DMPA as hydrophilic groups dissolved in DMF, DBTDL
as catalyst and HDO (chain extension) was added to the
flask. After 2 h, the residual NCO content reached the
desired value. The prepolymer was cooled to < 50°C and
TEA was added to neutralize the carboxylic acid for 30
min. During the neutralization, acetone was added to
decrease the viscosity. Then, the prepolymer was dispersed
in deionized water for 30 min (Schemel). Finally, acetone
was removed by spin-steaming at 50°C for 30 min to
obtain the WPU. The compositions of the WPU disper-
sions are shown in Table 1.
NCO content was tested according to the Chinest
standard HG-T2409-1992 (formula 1):
where Vo is the wasting volume of a standard solution of
hydrochloric acid (HCl) of a blank control, V is the wasting
volume of a standard solution of HCl of the samples (the
unit of volume is mL), c is 0.5 mol/L, which is the
concentration of the standard solution of HC1, M is the
weight of the samples, and 0.042 is cqual to 1 mL of a
standard solution of HCl concentration.
2.4 Preparation of WPU films
WPU dispersions were poured onto a teflon disc and dried
under ambient conditions for 24 h to prepare the films.
Then the films were vacuum-dried at 45°C for 2 h and
stored in a vacuum desiccator at room temperature
2.5 Analyses
Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared
dM pue Id jo suousmseowu (81La-V) Adossonoods
samples were obtained using a Nicolet iS5 spectrometer
(Thermo Fisher, USA) at room temperature. The FTIR
spectra were recorded by accumulating 16 scans at a
resolution of 4 cm~′ in the wavenumber range from 4000 to
500 cm*.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements were 
u 01 o  go stm ods  ( su
performed using a Q50o thermogravimetric analyzer (TA
Film samples were heated under a nitrogen environment in
the temperature range from room temperature to 600°C at a
heating rate of 10°C/min (nitrogen flow rate, 60 mL/min).
Dynamic differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
experiments were carried out using a Q200 Calorimeter
Dynamic
differential
scanning
calorimetry (DSC)
experiments were carried out using 
a Q200 Calorimeter
Scheme 1 Synthesis route of the WPU dispersions
Table 1  Sample designations and compositions of the WPU dispersions
(TA Instruments, USA) with sample weights from 3 to
6 mg cut from the films. The samples sealed in an
aluminum pan were heated under a nitrogen atmosphere at
a heating rate of 10°C/min (nitrogen flow rate, 60 mL/min)
within a range from
 70°C to 120°C
Bruker D8 Advance
Ihe
instrument (Bruker, Ettlingen,
Cier-
andthc
ments were made. The test films were cut into a dumbbell
shape and the mechanical properties were measured at
room temperature on a UTM6104 material testing machine 
(Suns Technology Co., China) at a cross-head speed of
100 mm/min. The walnut wood pieces were cut into strips
poddeoao sdns om pue tuu Z × oo1 × 57 Sunseou
(about 25 × 12.5 mm² adhesive area). The shear strengths
were obtained as the average maximum load per square
millimeter of shear area.
The molecular structure of PDI and the progress of the
reaction between PDI and N210 to fomm WPU were
estimated from the FTIR spectra. As shown in Fig. 1(a),the
3467 cm~ decreases significantly and the peaks of the
NH bond (NH stretching at 3345 cm′, NH bending
vibration at 1530 cm~′) appear [6,30,31], indicating the
reaction of the hydroxyl group of N210 with the isocyanate
(NCO) group of PDI. Meanwhile, the crystalline hydro-
gen-bonded carbonyl (C =O) absorption at around
1718 cm also confirmed the formation of the NCO-
terminated PU prepolymers [31]. The absorption at
1249 cm*′ was assigned to the coupled peaks of the CN
stretching vibration [2]. After adding DMPA and HDO,
chain extension progressed until the characteristic absorp-
tion peak intensity of the free NCO at 2275 cm was
reduced to a constant value [27]. On the other hand, the
ATR-IR spectra shows the absorption at 1108 cm
belonging to COC stretching is in concordance with
the N210 spectrum [32]. Further, the bands at around
s os  on posoo o I pe o
vibration and bending vibration of the methylene groups
(CH), respectively [26]. Moreover, the peaks at around
2930 and 1363 cm belong to the CH antisymmetric
stretch and the bending vibration of CH, [33]
with different NCO/OH ratios. The stretching bands of the
hydrogen-bonded NH and C = O shift to lower wave-
numbers than those of the free NH and C = O [34]. For
example, the NH stretching peak of WPU was at
the hydrogen bonding of the NH groups as proton donors 
with the C =O groups as proton acceptors during the
formation of WPU [36]. Generally, the extent of hydrogen
bonding plays a key role in the estimation of the
segregation effects of hard and soff segments in WPU.
Across the scries the intensity of the band area ncar
3345 cm′ is gradually strengthened, suggesting that the
extent of hydrogen bonding between NH and C=O
increases with the increase in the NCO/OH ratio. The more 
highly hydrogen-bonded hard segments as a physical
crosslink can result in more significant phase separation
between the hard and soft segments because hydrogen
bonding restricts the segmental motion of the polymer
chain [35]
To further study the effect of the NCO/OH ratio, the
C=O stretching vibration in the region from 1600 to
1800 cm~ was investigated, as depicted in Fig. 1(c). The
C = O groups were divided into fre and bonded urethane
carbonyl groups (17391707 cm) and urea carbonyl
groups (17001635 cm ) [37]. As the NCO/OH ratio
increases, the intensities of the absorption peaks of the urea
carbonyl groups and the NH bending peak at 1531 cm
of the urea group are enhanced (Fig. 1(a)). Because the
urea groups are generated during chain extension of the
prepolymer, the results suggest that the degree of hydrogen
bonding and the regularity of the segment structure of
WPU are affected significantly by the NCO/OH ratio.
1.2Thermalcharactenzation oftheWPUhlm
TGA curves for thermal degradation of the investigated
WPU are presented in Fig. 2, and the detailed characteristic
data of TGA are shown in Table 2. The complex
degradation mechanism of WPU is related to their
chemical molecular backbone structure and was studied
on the peaks in the derivative curves. As for WPU3.0-1.8,
a small proportion of the mass loss in the 50°C200°C
region may be due to the removal of residual water, solvent
or the decomposition of allophanate. The derivative curves
of the samples with different NCO/OH ratios suggest that
there are two primary pyrolysis processes: the degradation
of the hard segments formed through the urethane and urca
bonds at 240°C360°C and the degradation of the more
stable soft segments at higher temperatures between 367°C
and 370°C [5,3839]. As shown in Table 2, the mass loss
of the soff segment content for sample WPU2.2 is greater
than that for sample WPU3.0. Moreover, the mass loss
corresponding to the degradation of the hard segment
content (urethane and urea bonds) in the WPU decreases
when the NCO/OH ratio decreases from 3.0 to 2.2. It was
also observed that two temperatures, Tios and Tso%, at
Fig. 1 F11R s
er, PD1,
ymer, (b)
Fig. 2 TGA curves of WPU films with different NCO/OH ratios
which 10% and 50% degradations occur, are lower for
WPU3.0-1.8 than for WPU2.2-1.8. This trend indicates
that thermal stability increases with decreasing the NCO/
OH ratio from 3.0 to 2.2 due to the poorer thermal
resistance of hard segments than that of soft segments
ratio on the thermal properties of WPUs was provided by
the DCS analysis, as shown in Fig. 3. WPU2.2-1.8 exhibits 
only one glass transition temperature related to soft
segments at 39.4°C, probably due to the low intensity
of the hard segment phase [38,40]. However, WPU2.61.8
and WPU3.01.8 have two glass transition temperatures.
The first one is related to the sof segments (Tg SS) at
The first one is related to the
47.7°C and  47.6°C. As the NCO/OH ratio decreases,
the incremental increase of Tg SS might be attributed to the
increase of soft segment content. Because of the high OH
activity, the high cross-linking density restricts the
segmental mobility of the polymer chains and strengthens
the intermmolecular interactions [17,41]. This result sug-
gests that a higher degrce of phase separation between the
hard and soft segments is generated with increasing NCO/
OH ratio, as confimed by the result for the hydrogen
bonding from the FTIR spectra. The second glass transi-
tion temperature corresponding to the hard segments (Tg
hs) appears at 45.18°C and 35.4°C, probably due to the
formation of stronger hydrogen bonding which leads to
more compact packing of the hard segments. For the two
WPUs, the transitions appear in the temperature range of
61°C79.3°C because of the disruption of hard domains
with the short-range order of WPU.
by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis,
andthe X-ray
diffractograms are shown in Fig. 4. There is no sharp
peak for the soft segments, indicating an amorphous
structure of WPU. The two broad diffraction peaks at 29 =
22° (main diffraction peak) and 43° are attributed to the
soft segments in the segmented PUs [39]. With increasing
the NCO/OH ratio, the intensity of the diffraction peaks
decrease, indicating a decrease in crystallinity.
Table 2 TGA data of WPU films with different NCO/OH ratio
ig.4XRDofWPUhlnswithdifterentNCOOHratios
Figure 5(a) shows FTIR spectra of the WPU films with
different HDO/DMPA ratios. The intensity of the band
near 3345 cm* gradually increases with increasing the
contribution to the band area near 3460 cm°′, indicating
that the H-bonding extent between NH and C=O
increases with the decrease of DMPA content in HDO/
DMPA. The C = O stretching vibrations in the region from
1600 to 1800 cm ′ are shown in Fig. 5(b). Three absorption
peaks at around 1718, 1700 and 1688 cm were observed
in the FTIR spectra of C =O groups with different HDO/
DMPA molar ratios. The peak at 1718 cm′ is due to
Fig. 5 FTIR spectra of (a) WPU films with different HDO/
DMPA molar ratio, and (b) C = O stretching vibrations
hydrogen bonding to the C = O of the urethane linkages,
whereas the peak at 1700 cm*′ corresponds to the free C =
O of the urea groups. The absorption peaks of hydrogen
bonds to the urea groups ncar 1688 cm′ are enhanced
when the HDO/DMPA molar ratio increases to 2.4. The
results show that the degree of hydrogen bonding of WPU
is affected by the HDO/DMPA ratio.
2.2Thermalcharactenzation of theWPUhilm
TGA curves of the WPU films are presented in Fig. 6. For
all of the WPU samples, the insignificant mass loss in the
50°C200°C region is caused by the removal of residual
water or solvent or the decomposition of allophanate. The
detailed characteristic data of thermal decomposition are
summarized in Table 3. As shown in Table 3, Tios and
Tso% values increase with increasing the HDO/DMPA
molar ratio, indicating that the thermal stability of WPU is
enhanced as the HDO/DMPA molar ratio is increased from
1.8 to 2.4. This is ascribed to the high extent of hydrogen
bonding, which is in good agreement with the results of the
FTIR measurements.
Fg.6TGA
The effect of the different HDO/DMPA ratio on the
thermal properties and crystallinity of the WPU
studied using the DCS analysis. As shown Fig. 7, Tg SS
Was
increases a little from
42.6°Cto
41.8°Casthe
crystallinity ratio
hble3TGAdataandDSCdihotWPUfilmswithditferemHlXWDMPAmolarratioe
DMPA molar ratios
because the hard segment domains are dispersed in the
amorphous soff-segment micro-domains and the segmental
motion is thus restricted. This result suggests that a higher
degree of phase separation between the hard and soft
no v/OCH Suse q p si suios
ratio. According to the DSC data (Table 3), the
temperatures of the melting peaks increase as the HDO/
DMPA molar ratio increases from 1.8 to 2.4. The melting
enthalpy (AHμ) increases as the HDO/DMPA molar ratio
increases from 1.8 to 2.2 but decreases as the HDO/DMPA
molar ratio increases from 2.2 to 2.4. This result indicates
that the crystallinity is improved in the following order:
WPU3.0-1.8 < WPU3.0-2.4 < WPU3.0-2.0 < WPU3.0-
2.2. This result is also confirmed by XRD (Fig. 8). The
increase in the DMPA content reduces the crystallinity,
which is attributed to higher ionic content [26]. WPU3.0-
2.4 has a lower crystallinity possibly because of its higher
degree of hydrogen bonding compared to WPU3.0-2.0 and
WPU3.0-2.2.
The measurement results of tensile strength, shear strength,
and elongation at break of the WPU films are shown in Fig.
9. All the WPU films display low tensile strength due to the
aliphatic character of PDI [6]. As the HDO/DMPA molar
ratio increase, WPU3.0-2.4 exhibits a maximum tensile
Fig. 9  Tensile strength, elongation at break, and shear strength of
WSPU films with different HDO/DMPA molar ratios
strength; however, the elongation at break decreases
significantly. The increases in tensile strength and the
decrease in elongation at break might be due to a higher
degree of hydrogen bonding and cross-linking density with
decreasing DMPA content.
WPU dispersions, which may possibly be used as
adhesives, were compared for adhesive performance. As
shown in Fig. 9, WPU with a higher HDO/DMPA molar
ratio exhibits a stronger shear strength than the other WPU
samples. This result suggests that the shear strength of
WPU could be improved through adjustment of the content
of the components.
Conclusions
rent NCO/OH ratios
and HDO/DMPA
nolar
ratios
PDI
have
been
synthesized
using
thc
dispersions were investigated on their chemical character-
ization, thermal stability, crystallinity, and mechanical
properties. The FTIR results show that increasing the
NCO/OH ratio (reduction of polyether) or the HDO/
DMPA molar ratio could improve the extent of ordered
hydrogen bonding, and the NCO groups could generate
urea groups during chain extension of the prepolymer. A
higher HOD/DMPA molar ratio or lower NCO/OH ratio is
associated with improved thermal stability. An increase in
the NCO/OH ratio or the amount of DMPA in the HDO/
DMPA molar ratio decreases the glass transition tempera-
ture, which might be due to a greater degree of phase
separation in the PUs. Finally, all WPU films display low
tensile strength due to the aliphatic nature of PDI, and
WPU3.0-2.4 has the maximum tensile strength and shear
strength.
Aeknowlkdgement
Aeknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 21576134 and 51503097), the
National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No.
2016YFA0204300), and the Jiangsa Province Natural Science Foundation
(No. BK20150244).
References
