Synthesis and properties of spray-applied high solid content two
componentpolyurethane
coatings based on polycaprolactone polyols
noSubut'nyzueuex',oerxuenSuenHueys
ABSTRACT
1.Introductior
As the increasingly stringent laws about the utilization and
emission of the volatile organic compounds (VoC), the coatings
industryisunder great pressure toreducetheVOCcontents of coat-
ing products. The options available for meetingthe requirement on
VOC of coatings are well known as waterborne coatings, powder
coatings, UV curable coatings and high solid content coatings [14]
For obvious reasons of the excellent mechanical properties and the
the preferable routes to reduce the VOC level in coatings industry
outstanding adaptability, the high solid content (HSC) coatings are
High solid content two component polyurethane (HSC 2K-PU)
conventional solvent-borne systems in many diverse fields of the
coatings industry because of their environmental,technical and low
nsisted of hydroxyl
E-matladsress:cejqquescut.educm(lQa
(BDO), diethylene glycol (DEG), neopentyl glycol (NPC) 2,4-diethyl-1,5-pentanediol (PD-9), 1,4
caprolactone initiated by small molecular polyols including ethylene glycol (EG). 1,4-butanediol
cyclohexanedimethanol (CHDM), trimethylolpropane (TMP). di-trimethylolpropane (Di-TMP). di-
pentaerythritol (DiPE) and maltitol. IR and H NMR spectra of PCLs disclosed that -caprolactone reacted
paedad Agngssaons aam sd iae a uaq sjofjod ejnoa(ou (jeus po sdno xopq a qm
and possessed similar molecular skeleton structures. The GPC data summarized the measured umber-
average molecular weights ofPCLs approached totheirtheoretical values, and the polydispersity indexes
(PDI) were ranged from 1.35 to 1.58. PCL.s prepared with maltitol displayed the highest viscosity up
to 42000 mPas, while products obtained from diol substrates including EG, BDO, DEG, NPG and PD-9
exhibited the lower viscosities in the range of 160300 mPas. The cured films of PCLs prepared from
polyisocyanate curing agents exhibited good impact resistance, adhesion, flexibility, higher hardness
and displayed better thermal stability with 5% weight loss at 260-C. PCLs obtained from TMP (PCL-7,
TMP/3-CL) and Di-TMP (PCL-8, Di-TMP/4e-CL) exhibited the higher films hardness and lower viscosi-
ties at 1003% solid content. The viscosities ofPCL-7 and PCL-8 were 1320 and 3900 mPas,respectively and
the VOC contents of spray-applied 2K-PU coatings prepared from PCL-7 and PCL-8 were low to 180 g/L.
 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reser
ved
resins and polyisocyanate curing agents and the key technology of
HSC 2K-PU coatings is preparing low viscosity, high solid content
hydroxyl resins. Conventional hydroxyl resins used for the prepara-
tion of 2K-PU coatings are usually including alkyd resins, polyester
resins and hydroxyl acrylic resins [711]. However, these resins
are usually linear polymers with the higher molecular weights, and
possessing high viscosities to be hard to formulate HSC 2K-PU coat-
ings [10,11]. Meeting the requirements for high solid and low VOC
always been a challenge [12].
contents without compromising on the coatings performance has
In general, the VOC contents of 2K-PU coatings mainly depend
on the properties of polyols and polyisocyanates, as well as the
construction process [13] Developing HSC 2K-PU coatings, one tra-
dlitional approach is to reduce the viscosities of hydroxyl resins by
lowering the molar weight or narrowing the molar weight distri-
bution [4.14,15]. However, hydroxyl resins with the low molecular
weight often result in poor drying behavior and mechanical prop-
erty, such as long drying and recoating time, low hardness and
abrasion resistance [15,16]. Moreover, the using of low molecular
weight hydroxyl resins is always resulted only a moderate increase
in the solid content compared with conventional high-molecular
systems [14,16]. Another approach, the use of reactive diluents,
which become a part of the coating films after drying and indeed
increases the solid content considerably [1416]. But such formu-
lations are usually much more expensive because of the higher
of the strong hydroxyl bonding effects, the high polarity and cohe-
Hydroxyl polyesters (HPs) always exhibit high viscosity because
sive energy of ester groups in molecules of HPs [6]. Recently, several
studies have reported that the partial replacement of the hydroxyl
an increase in solid content at the application viscosity as well
groups in HPs with the less polar acetoacetate groups leads to
found that the structural variation of diol and acetoacetylation
as increase in adhesion due to chelate effect [4,6]. Raju et al. [6]
help in significant reduction of viscosity of HPs and that is also
reflected in an increase in solid contents of coatings, Meanwhile,
there are many articles and patents focused on the oligomers con-
tained potential reactive groups, such as oxazolidines, aspartate,
aldimines and ketimines oligomers [17]. Those potential reactive
groups are unblocked or activated and generated reactive groups
when exposed to the air humidity. However, the slow unblocking
reaction would lengthen the whole film-forming times, further-
more the unblocking reaction sometimes releases organic volatiles
Recently, the increase in molecular branching is performed
along with the reduction of molecular weights of the poly-
ols [15]. The highly branched hydroxyl-terminated polymers
(i.e. dendrimer, hyperbranched polymer, star polymer, etc.) have
ny Sueo u padde pue suone peas paee uaag
lations [15]. In our previous studies [2022]. we prepared a
series of hydroxyl-terminated hyperbranched polyesters (HBPs)
via “pseudo one-step" method, then used c-caprolactone and dif-
ferent mono-carboxylic acids to modify these HBPs. The results
showed that using lauric acid to cap part of hydroxyl groups and
utilizing e-caprolactone to react with end-hydroxyl groups of 2,2-
dimethylol propionic acid then to extend the carbon chains could
effectively reduce the viscosity of HBPs, and the lowest viscos-
ity of the modified HBPs was only 7500 mPa s and the highest
film hardness of 2K-PU coatings was F. However, these reported
hydroxyl-terminated HBPs have always been synthesized through
In addition, the xylene homologues used as the water-carrying
“pseudo one-step* method [20,23], the viscosities are still higher.
agent is difficult to be fully removed and will bring the environ-
mental and health hazard [24,25]. DuPont Company developed
polyesters based on star oligomers via the ring-opening polycon-
densation, and these polyester star oligomers have been used as
the sole hydroxyl component in 2K-PU coatings to boost-up the
solid contents with a good overall balance of properties, and the
lowest VOC was about 3 Ibs/gal [17,2629]. Huybrechts et al. [17]
prepared the star oligoethers by ring-opening polyetherification
of mono epoxyesters with different polyols, and the lowest VOC
contents of 2 K clear coatings based on the branched polyethers
was at 2.1 Ibs/gal with an acceptable overall balance of pot life,
onod pue Aqenp 'oueseadde
easily occurs ring-opening reaction with hydroxyl-terminated
compounds without reducing the number of hydroxyl groups
and generates high-active primary hydroxyl groups. In the mean-
reduce the viscosity and enhance the flexibility of the modified
while, the introduction of flexible hexa-carbon chain can effectively
products. Hong et al. [30] used ε-caprolactone to modify the
hydroxyl-terminated HBPs and obtained a hyperbranched polyol
with long flexible chains on the surface of molecule, then the hyper-
branched polyol was adlded into epoxy resin to prepare cationic UV
curing films and found that the flexibility and impact resistance of
the films increased significantly. Morell et al. [31] prepared mul-
tiarm star hyperbranched poly(glycidol)-b-poly(c-caprolactone)
by cationic ring-opening polymerization of e-caprolactone from
a poly(glycidol) core and used it to modify diglycidylether of
bisphenol A (DGEBA) formulations. Their study showed that the
addition of star-like structures modifiers decreased the global
shrinkage, and increased the conversion at gelation, and led to
a more toughened fracture of the thermoset in comparison to
sre puqau paredad [zel re pa sas va and
copolyesters by the copolymerization of e-caprolactone and 2,2-
the introduction of g-caprolactone decreased the viscosity of
bis(hydroxymethyl)butyric acid, and the results displayed that
polyesters and the flexibility of coating film also greatly increased.
Nowadays, polycaprolactone diols have been wildly used as macro-
diol extender in the preparation of PU materials [33,34]. However,
there are few literatures have reported the utilization of polycapro-
lactone polyols as the sole hydroxyl component in the preparation
of spray-applied 2K-PU coatings.
a simple method and to prepare spray-applied HSC 2K-PU coat-
ings based on the star-like polyols, We synthesized a series of
polycrprolactone (PCLs) polyols via the ring-opening reaction of z-
caprolactone initiated by ten kinds of small molecular polyols, and
used FTIR, NMR and GPC to characterize their structures and molec-
ular weights. The cured films of PCL polyols were prepared using
sadod aisuaqasdo aag pue suase Suno aeuesosod
were tested. The influence ofthe categories of small molecular poly-
polyols and their 2K-PU film properties were investigated. Since
ols and the molar ratios of raw materials on the viscosities of PCl
the performance of polyisocyanate component is also important
for the VOC contents of 2K-PU coatings, the influence of different
the high performance, low VOC, high solid content 2K-PU coatings
polyisocyanate on the 2K-PU film properties were investigated and
were prepared.
2.Experimenta
2.1. Materials cnd reogents
Ethylene glycol (EG), 1,4-butanediol (BDO), diethylene gly-
col (DGE), neopentyl glycol (NPG), 2,4-diethyl-1,5-pentanediol
(PD-9), 1,4-cyclohexanedimethanol (CHDM), maltitol and anhy-
aiam pue sjuatleas apeig jefjeue [e aiam ajejae suz snop
purchased from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co,
Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Trimethylolpropane (TMP, 99%) and di-
trimethylolpropane (Di-TMP, 97%) were industrial products and
were obtained from Wuxi Baichuan Chemical Industrial Co., Ltd.
(Wuxi, China). Di-pentaerythritol (Di-PE, 90%) was industrial
product and was supplied by Yunnan Yuntianhua Co, Itd. (Zhao-
tong, China). e-Caprolactone (e-Cl, 99.5%) was indlustrial product
and was purchased from Perstorp Group (Sweden). H137H-80
(alkyd resin, with solid content of 80% in xylene, hydroxyl
value = 140 mg KOH/g, z/25 =C= 20000 mPas) and toluene diso-
cyanate/trimethylolpropane (TDI/TMP) adduct curing agent L-75
(industrial product, with solid content of 75% in ethyl acetate,
NCO% = 13 wt%, n)/25 °C = 2000 mPa s) were kindly provided by Car-
poly Chemical Group Co., Ltd. Jjiangmen, China). Diphenylmethane
solid content, NCO% =33.5 wt%, y/25°C= 30 mPa s), and polymeric
disocyanate curing agent (MDl-50) (industrial product, 100%
esnpu oota)uage ns aeeospuaudip auafqa
product, 100% solid content, NCO% = 31.1 wt%, n/25 °C =400 mPas)
were supplied by Wanhua Chemical Group Co, Ltd. (Yantai, China)
Solid raw materials (i.e. NPG, CHDM, TMP, Di-TMP, Di-PE and malti-
tol) were dried in vacuum oven at 100°C for4 h to remove moisture
prior to use. Liquid raw materials (ie, e-Cl, EG, BDO, DEG and PD-9)
materials were used as received without further purification.
were dried over 3 A molecular sieves for 3 days before use. All the
Scheme 1, Synthetic route and ideal molecular structure of PCL-1
2.2. Instruments end measurements
Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTiR) of PCls were recorded
on a PerkinElmer spectrum 2000 spectrometer. For each sample, it
was casted on the tinplate and scanned from 4000 to 400cm- at
a resolution of2cm-
(400 MHz) nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer. PCL samples
measured at room temperature in a Bruker AVANCE
400
were dissolved in deuterated dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO-ds) with
tetramethylsilane (TMS) as internal standard
(GPC) equipped with Shodex RI-201H differential refractive index
eluant at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/mir
14900:2001. The viscosities and dilution curves (namely relation-
ship of viscosity vs solid content) of PCls were surveyed at 25 °C
2.3. Synthesis of PCLs
The polycaprolactone polyols were symthesized via ring-
opening reaction of e-CL by using small molecular polyols and
stoichiometric EG (0.9 mol, 5.86 g) e-CL (1.8 mol, 205.45 g), and
anhydrous zinc acetate as the initiator and catalyst. Typically,
catalyst anhydrous zinc acetate (0.70g, 0.34 wt% of e-CL) were
added into a 500 mLfour-necked round bottom flask equipped with
Scheme 2. Ideal molecullar structures cf PCL-7 and PCL-8
a mechanical stirrer, thermometer, reflux condenser and nitrogen
inlet tube, and then the flask was heated to 120°C for 4h under
nitrogen atmosphere until the IR spectrum of reacting system dis-
closed that the characteristic absorption peak of e-CL at 1640 cm1
disappeared. Then the flask was cooled to 30°C to give a color-
less transparent fluid that was PCL-1. Other PCLs were synthesized
according to the similar process. The structural characterization
and performance test of all PCLs were conducted without further
purification. Scheme 1 describes the synthetic route and the ideal
molecular structure of PCL-1, and Scheme 2 describes the theoret-
ical molecular structures of PCL-7 and PCL-8.
2.4.Preparation of varnishes and test of Jlim propertte
methyl isoamyl ketone, then poyisocyanate curing agents were
The samples of PCLs were diluted to 50 wt% solid content with
adlded into the diluted samples to prepare varnishes according to
the molar ratio of NCO/OH as 1.05: 1. The films were casted on the
sfep e ioj 0s 1e paup pue jojesidde umf os e um sjaued isa
followed by 1 day at ambient temperature, then tested film prop-
erties. Pendulum hardness and pencil hardness were determined
according to ISO 1522:2006 and ISO 15184:2012, respectively.
Adhesion was measured using a cross-hatch cutter according to ISO
2409:2013. Gloss measurements according to ISO 2813:2014 were
performed at incidence angle of 60°, Bending and impact resistance
were determined according to IS0 1519:2011 and ISO 62722:2011,
respectively. VOC contents of vanishes were measured according to
ISO 11890-1:2007.
The HSC 2K-PU coatings were sprayed using GX-8 spraying
gun through Graco Reactor E-10 spraying machine (America). The
The influence of the small molecular polyos categories cn the viscosities ef FCls
spraying machine equipped with two heated supply tanks for
the polyols (component A) and polyisocyanates (component B).
The calculated amount PCL polyols, 0.2 wt% wetting agent, 0.2 wt%
Ieveling agent, 0.3 wt% defoaming agent were blended and homog-
enized with mechanical agitator, then them were poured into
the polyols tank of machine, while the polyisocyanates tank was
filled with the calculated amount polyisocyanate curing agents,
and then the temperature of the two components were controlled
at 3555 °C. In order to ensure the molar ratio of NCO/OH would
be about 1.05: 1 after the two components mixing in a volume
ratio of 1: 1, a certain amount of solvent was added to adjust the
volume of the two components. The fluid working pressure in the
was about 140 bar. The desired dry-filmthickness of one spray-
heated hoses of components A and B during the spraying process
applied layer was about 0.1 mm, and the total dry-film-thickness
was about 0.20.25 mm. The properties of coating films were tested
Suuno asod aoj sfep ≤ Joj uano 0s ut Busfsp uaug Jaje
mance of the spray-applied HSC 2K-PU coatings obtained from PCL
In order to evaluate the construction and application perfor-
polyols, including gel time, tack-free time and polishing time were
measured and analyzed to characterize the hardening behavior of
coating films, The gel time of 2K-PU coatings was determined by
referring the IS0 2535:2001. The polyols and polyisocyanates com-
ponents were blended in a reaction vessel, and then diluted to 65%
solid content using MIAK. Because of the intensively exothermal
reaction, the vessel was immediately placed in a 25  C thermostatic
water bath and then homogenized using a glass rod. The time mea-
surement began with the mixing of polyols and polyisocyanates
components and the gel time was determined by a glass rod repeat-
edly immersed in and removed from the reaction mixture until the
point when the rod draws fibers, The tack-free time was deter-
mined by repeatedly testing the film surface with a mass of cotton
until the cotton could freely detached from the film surface and
there was no stuck cotton debris on the film surface. In this paper,
we used 320 grit sandpaper to grind the surface of cured films, and
observed the grinding process according to the amount of powder
and whether the films stuck sandpaper or not to determine the
polishing time.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Inffuence of the small molecular polyols categories and molar
ratios on the viscosities of PCLs
The viscosity of polyols is an important parameter to evalu-
sueo nd-Xz SH Suuedasd ui aoueuuoad uoendde agn ane
Table 1 lists the viscosities of PCLs prepared with different small
molecular polyols. Table 2 describes the viscosities of liquid diol
raw materials measured at 20°C. It was found that PCLs prepared
lower viscosities in the range of 160300 mPa s because of the lower
from liquid diols including EG, DBO, DGE and PD-9 displayed the
Viscosities of liquid diols.
Ihe influence of mlolar ratios cf Di-TMP and ε-CL on the viscosities cf PCLs
The solubility ef PCL-8 in organic solrents.
hydroxyl functionality (fo = 2) and the lower initial viscosities of
diol substrates. Meanwhile, the viscosities of PCL diols exhibited
the increasing trend with the increase of diol substrates° viscosj-
ties, PCL-6 obtained from CHDM showed the highest viscosity in
all PCL diols because of the introduction of semi-rigid cyclohexyl
structures. Their viscosities were significantly increased from PCL-
Axopq pue giam senao jo aseaui a qm ot-d o1 9
functionality of polyol substrates, which may be atributed to the
PCls prepared with different molar ratios of Di-TMP to e-Cl, and
hydrogen bonding effects of PCLs. Table 3 lists the viscosities of
the results showed that the viscosities of PCLs were decreased with
increasing the amount of ε-Cl.
3.2.Solubility and difution cunves o/ PL2
For solvent-based coatings, the solubility of resins in organic
solvents is very important and a good solvent is conducive to
reduce viscosity and regulate the construction performance. Table 4
describes the solubility of PCL-8 in different organic solvents.
PCL-8 was easily soluble in moderate and strong polar solvents
including 2-butanone (MEK), methyl isoamyl ketone (MIAK), 1-
ethyl-2-pyrrolidone (NEP), ethyl acetate (EA), butyl acetate (BA)
propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PMA), and so on. How-
ever, the solubility in nonpolar solvents, e.g. toluene, xylene, were
relatively lower, which suggested that those compounds contained
jepod aq u panjossp Ajaaaga aou asam sdnoit fAxopq Aue
solvents, and it was coincided with the *like dissolves like" princi-
ple.
dilution curves) of PCL-8 in PMA, BA, and MIAK measured at 25°C
Fig. 1 illustrates the *viscosity vs solid content" curves (namely
with the solid contents ranged from 50% to 100%, The solution vis-
cosity of PCL-8 in PMA exhibited the highest value at the same solid
content, which may be because that PMA has the highest solvent
viscosity up to 1.2 mPa s (20 C) [37], while the solvent viscosity of
BA and MIAK are 0.73 mPa s and 0.74 mPas (20 -C) [37], respec-
tively. The solution viscosity of PCL-8 in MIAK was lower than that
of in BA at the same solid content, which may be owing to the
polarity of MIAK is higher than BA, and the ketone carbonyl group
of MIAK as hydrogen bond acceptor is preferred to corrupt the
hydrogen bonding of PCLs [38]. In contrast with linear PCL diols
of the similar molecular weight, such as Capa 2085, Capa 2077A
(industrial products of Perstorp Group, Sweden), PCL-8 exhibited
the lower bulk viscosity and had lower solution viscosity at the
Fig, 1. Viscosity vs solid content e
 curves of PCL-8 in propylene glycol
ther acetate (PMA), butyl acetate (BA)
50% to 100%
same solid content, for instance, the solution viscosity of 80% solid
content in MIAK was less than 160 mPa s and 56 mPa s of 70% solid
content in MIAK, which revealed that PCL-8 was more suitable for
preparing HSC 2K-PU coatings.
3.3.I. IR spectre of PCLs
Fig. 2 describes the IR spectra of PCLs. Due to the strong hydro-
gen bonding effects in molecule of PCLs, IR spectra exhibited the
strong and broad stretching vibration absorption peaks belonging
to the associated hydroxyl groups in the vicinity of 3440 cm1. The
-osse aam uo o8zpue ot6z 1e pareadde syead uoqdiosqe dieqs
of CH3, CH2 groups of PCLs, The strong and sharp absorp-
ciated to the symmetric and anti-symmetric stretching vibrations
tion peaks attributed to the stretching vibration of ester carbonyl
pauasaud pou peq epoads di° uo os1 se paueadde asam sdnoug
the characteristic absorption peak at 1640 cm~1 ascribed to the
lactone group of s-Cl, which revealed that g-Cl had completely
puaq a sood renoaou eus jo sdnors xopu qm paoeai
ing vibration absorption peaks of CH, and CH were appeared
at 1454cm-1. In the vicinity of 1176 cm-, the absorption peaks
were stretching vibration of C(C=O)O— groups, and absorption
peaks at 1072 cm-1 were assigned to the stretching vibration of
CO groups. All PCLs showed similar IR spectra, which indlicated
that these synthesized PCLs have analogous molecular skeleton
structures.
Fig. Z. IR spectra ot PCL-3, PCL-7. PRCL-8 amd PCL-9
Hydroxyl values (mg KOH/g). molecular weights (g/mol) and molecular weight dis
tribution (PDl) of PCLs
3.3.2. H NMR spectre of PCLs
ical shiftassignments of PCL-7 and PCL-8, respectively. The specific
Fig. 3 (a) and 3 (b) de
proton peaks of CHs groups at co 0.8 ppm was chosen as the
internal standard to determine the relative integral intensities of
other proton peaks. Specific peaks of H NMR (8, ppm) for PCL-7
were as follows [31,39,40]:  = 0.81 (CHs, 3H, H);  = 1.301.54
(CH, 20H, H, Hs. Hg, H, Ho): &= 2.28 (CHC=O, 6H, H4):
= 3.273.38 (CH0H, 6H, Hg);  = 3.873.99 (CHO(C=0),
6H, Hs): =4.164.65 (OH, 3H, Hg). Specific peaks of H NMR
(6, ppm) for PCL-8 were as follows [31,39,40]: &=0.79 (CH,
6H, H);  =1.311.55 (CH, 28H, H, Hs, He, H, Hto):  = 2.28
(CHC=O, SH, H4):  =3.18 (CHO, 4H, H):; 3= 3.283.38
= 4.154.43 (OH, 4H, Hg) Owing to the chain ring-opening poly-
(CHzOH, 8H, Hg): 5=3.873.99 (CHO(C=O), 8H, H);
merization of e-CL, the characteristic proton peaks of hydroxyl
groups (OH) were divided into 3 groups in the vicinity of
4.154.43, and the characteristic proton peaks of CHO(C=0)
around 3.873.99 were also divided into 3 groups. All integral
data of proton peaks were almost consistent with their corre-
the ring-opening reaction of z-CL was fully conducted. PCL-7 and
sponding theoretical proton numbers, which demonstrated that
PCL-8 displayed similar H NMR spectra, and their corresponding
indicated that they have analogous molecular skeleton structures.
chemical shifts of specific protons were approximate, which also
3.3.3. Hydroxyl values and GPC data of PCLs
The theoretical and measured hydroxyl values of PCLs are listed
in Table 5, and their molecular weights as well as PDI data are
also given. The GPC curves of PCls are described in Fig. 4. All GPC
curves showed just a symmetric single peak, which disclosed that
there were not residual raw materials and low molecular weight
by-products in these PCL products. As shown in Fig. 4, the elution
enao gao a m si aam sd jo sa
weights, for example, PCL-9 was of the largest molecular weight
and it wasfirstlyeluted, and then followed byPCL-8,PCL-7 and PCL-
3 with smaller molecular weights. The measured number-average
molecular weights (Ms) of PCLs were close to their theoretical
molecular weights Mhey)and the PDI data were ranged from 1.35
to 1.58, which also indicated that the ring-opening reaction of g-
CL was conducted completely and obtained these products whose
structures were basically closed to the theoretical molecular struc-
tures., The measured hydroxyl values (HV) were approached to
the theoretical hydroxyl values (HV), which suggested that the
reaction system had not occurred etherification reaction between
the hydroxyl groups to reduce the hydroxyl content of PCLs.
Fig. 5 describes the TG (a) and DTG (b) curves of PCL-7,
PCL-8 cured by L-75, PM-400 and blending curing agents (L-
Fig, 3. 'H NMR spectra of PCL-7 (a) and PCL-8 (b) in DMSO-ds: * means the signal of solvent proton
films of PCL-7 and PCL-8 obtained from L-75 or blending curing
75: MD1-50 = 1: 1, mass ratio), respectively. As shown, the cured
agents L-75/MDI-50 exhibited almost similar two-step degrada-
tion behaviors. Their initial decomposition temperature was about
200 °C (weight loss exceeded 1%) and the 5% weight loss temper-
ature was about 260°C, which displayed that these cured films
have good thermal stability. Fig. 5 suggests that the introduction
of bi-functional curing agent MDI-50 has not weaken the thermal
cured films obtained from PM-400 displayed higher decomposition
stability of cured films compared with using L-75 alone, while the
temperature to reach the same weight loss. The DTG curves summa-
rized that these cured ilms of PCL-8 have better thermal stability
compared with the analogs of PCL-7 obtained from the same cur-
ing agents, which may be due to the increasing of the molecular
weights and hydroxyl functionalities of PCLs were able to increase
the crosslinking densities of cured films and then to enhance their
thermal stability
3.5. Film properties of PCL.
75 curing agent was used to formulate 2K-PU and the cured film
In order to select the PCLs with better overall performance, L-
Fig. 4. GPC curves of PCL-3, PCL-7, PCL-8 and PCL-9
properties are listed in Table 6. The results showed that these
cured films have good impact resistance, adhesion, flexibility. The
pencil hardness of PCL diols was low to F, and with the decreas-
ing of their hydroxyl values (Table 5), then the consumption of
poyisocyanates decreased, so their pendulum hardness exhibited
decreasing trends, However, the viscosity (Table 1) and pendulum
hardness of PCL-6 was higher than those of other PCL diols because
cosities (Table 1) and films hardness were significantly increased
of the existence of cyclohexyl structure. In the meantime, their vis-
with the increase of molecular weights and hydroxyl functionali-
ties from PCL-6 to PCL-10, which may be due to the higher hydroxyl
functionalities of PCLs were more effectively to form crosslinking
structures, thereby enhancing the films hardness as well as other
mechanical properties. Table 6 also lists the film properties of PCLs
prepared from Di-TMP and e-CI with different molar ratios (i.e. PCL-
S, and PCL-11 to PCL-15). With the amount of z-Cl increased, their
viscosities (Table 3) and films hardness were notably decreased,
which may be explained that for these compounds with the same
skeleton structure and hydroxyl functionality, the films hardness
will be decreased accompanied with the decreasing of hydroxyl
values (Table 5), and the less consumption amount of the curing
agents. As shown, the adhesion and impact resistance of PCL diols
(from PCL-1 to PCL-6) were all weaker than those PCL polyols (from
PCL-7 to PCL-10), which was because the lower hydroxyl function-
of cured films and then weakened part of mechanical properties.
ality of PCL diols resulted in the incompact crosslinking structures
PU coatings. Here PCL-7 and PCL-8 were selected as the preferable
 jo sadod  pue s o  ro neo Aa
hydroxyl components, and then the influence of different poly-
isocyanates on the overall performance of 2K-PU coatings were
high viscosity L-75 with the mass ratio as 1: 1, and the blend-
investigated. Low viscosity, solvent-free MDI50 was blended with
ing curing agents L75/MDI-50 possessed very low viscosity only
80mPas at 87.5% solid content in ethyl acetate. The polymeric
methylene diphenyldlisocyanate curing agent PM-400 and blend-
ing curing agents L-75/MDI-50 were used as the polyisocyanates,
with the molar ratio of NCoj0H as 1.05: 1, and the spraying pro-
respectively. The PCLs and polyisocyanate components were mixed
cess was conducted using the Graco Reactor E-10 spraying machine.
The formula of HSC 2K-PU coatings are listed in Table 7, and then
their comprehensive performance are given in Table 8. In order to
compare and evaluate the application performance of HSC 2K-PU
coatings as the wood coatings, the conventional alkyd resin H137H-
80 (Table 7) was introduced and its film properties obtained from
the same curing agents are also listed in Table 8. H137H-80 was
sprayed using VW-77-3G spraying gun (ANEST IWATA Corporation,
Japan, gun nozzle Φ =2.5 mm) through the traditional pre-mixing
process, and the initial construction viscosity of 2K-PU was about
20 s (NK-2 IVADA viscosity cup, ANEST IWATA Corporation).
curing agents L-75/MDI-50
using L-75 alone, which possibly bec
aecn
tionality of the blending
Flm properties of PCLs cured with L-75.
of HSC 2K-PU 
 (L-75: MD)-50= 1
crosslinking densities as well as weakening physical and mechan
ical properties of cured films [35,36]. Meanwhile, the higher NCC
functionality of PM-400 led to the higher hardness of cur
red films
functionality of PM-400 led to the higher hardness of cured films.
PCL-8 exhibited shorter gel times, tack-free times and polish-
ing times, the probable reasons were that PCL-8 has four hydroxyl
groups in per molecule, and it has higher viscosity and higher
molecular weight compared with PCL-7, and thereby PCL-8 was
easily to build crosslinking films and get a certain mechanical
strength in a shorter time. PM-400 has a higher NCO functional-
ity compared with MDl-50, and its NCO groups activity is higher
than L-75, therefore the 2K-PU formulations prepared from PM-
400 showed shorter gel times, tack-free times and polishing times
dlue to the faster reaction rate.
Compared with the film properties of allyd resin H137H-80
cured by the same curing agents, cured films of PCL-7 and PCL-8
exhibited a good advantage in the film flexibility. In the mean-
time, the polishing time of PCL-7 and PCL-8 were all less than
160 min, which were significantly less than the comparative values
100% solid content were only 1320 and 3900 mPa s, respectively.
(265280 min) of H137H-80. The viscosities of PCL-7 and PCL-8 at
and the VOC contents of spray-applied 2K-PU coatings obtained
from PCL-7 and PCL-8 were all less than 180 g/L, which were much
lower than the comparative values (452465 g/L) of H137H-80. As
to the traditional solvent-borne 2K-PU wood coatings, the entire
technological process is usually more than 20 h, and the final thick-
ness of cured film is generally greater than 0.200 mm. Considering
all performance data listed in Table 8, the HSC 2K-PU coatings pre-
pared from PCLs were expected that through one or two spraying
to achieve the equivalent application performance of alkyd resin
75/M
The pendulum hardness and pencl hardness were measured on glass plates
H137H-80 that obtained by traditional multiple spraying, which
not only can save time, but also can greatly reduce the VOC content
of coatings. In addition, it also should be noted that these 2K-PU for-
mula based on PCLs does not apply to the traditional construction
process (i.e. pre-mixing and then spraying) due to the higher reac-
tivity of polyisocyanate curing agents and the existence of catalyst
anhydrous zinc acetate in PCLs.
4.Conclusion
A series of PCL polyols were synthesized using the ring-opening 
reaction of z-caprolactone initiated by small molecular polyols. IR
and H NMR spectra of PCLs disclosed that &-CI has reacted with
hydroxyl groups of small molecular polyols and all PCLs possessed
the similar molecular skeleton structures. GPC results revealed that 
the measured Mn were approached to the theoretical molecular
weights with the PDI data ranged from 1.35 to 1.58. PCLs pre-
pared from liquid diols including EG, DBO, DGE and PD-9 displayed
the lower viscosity in the range of 160300 mPas, and their films
hardness were all lower than 0.70. The viscosities of PCL polyols
with dlifferent hydroxyl functionalities were significantly increased
with the increasing of molecular weight and hydroxyl functional-
ity, and maltitol displayed the highest viscosity up to 42000 mPas.
With increasing the amount of e-Cl, the viscosity and film hardness
of PCLs prepared from Di-TMP and ε-Cl were also decreased. The
cured films of all PCLs displayed good impact resistance, adhesion,
flexibility as well as higher hardness. The HSC spray-applied 2K-PU
coatings obtained from PCL-7 and PCL-8 exhibited very low VOC
contents within 180 g/L
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of Guangdong, China (No. 2015A030313205)
the Science and Technology Program of Guangdong Province
(No. 2015A010105010), and Special Project on the Integration
of Industry, Education and Research of Guangdong Province
(Nos. 2012A090300004, 2014B090903010, 2015B0909250062,
2016B030302004 and 2016B090930005)
References
