High-ThermalConductiveCoatingUsedonMetalHeatExchanger
LI Jing (李静)*,LIANG Ju (梁剧) and LIU Yeming(刘业明)
Abstraet Based on modified silico
sion-resistant fillers, heat-resistant fillers and thermal conductive fillers, a high thermal conductive coating can be
made. On the basis of boronnitride (BN) and aluminum nitride (AIN) used as thermal conductive fillers and by
means of the testing system of hot disk and heat transfer experiment, researches on the varieties of thermal conduc-
tive fillers and the effects of the contents of high-thermal conductive coating have been done, which shows that the
conductivity of the themal conductive filles of cating. With guaranteeing better heat resistance, stronger coro-
thermal conductivity of coating increases writh the increase of the quality fraction and the coefficient of thermal
sion resistance and adhesive force, the coefficient of coating can reach a level as high as 3 W·m*′ K
Keywords
thermal conduetivity, heat exchanger, coating
INTRODUCTION
Metal heat exchanger is a common piece of
cquipment in chemical industry [1] and the corrosion
problem in the process of production seriously affects
the life span of the heat exchanger. As coating is im-
portant to protect hcat exchangers from corrosion, and
the thermal conductivity of coating is important for
metal heat exchange [2, 3], in order to reduce the dis-
sary to prepare an excellent anti-corrosion coating
with high thermal conductivity and good heat resis-
tance to be applied to metal heat exchanger for using a
long time. At present, there are successive reports on
thermal conductivity of coating. For example, Leivo [4]
found that the thermal conductivity of coating was
improved by adding thermal conductive filer. Lu [5]
found that BN/silicon resin system had excellent heat
thermal conductivity of coating was sharply increased
dissipation properties. Fukushima [6] found that the
with increasing quantity of graphite fillers. However,
there are very few reports about high-thermal conduc-
tive coating applied to metal heat exchanger. This ar-
ticle provides a coating of thermal conductivity of 2.5
   
re-
ported by Zhou [7] and studies the relationship be-
tween thermal conductivity of coating and thermal
conductive particles.
Preparation of raw material
the
tion of China (51176053), the Key Technologies R&:D Pro
rogram of Guangdong Province (2011B090400562), the Strategic
 (2001CB710703), the Natic
onal Natural Science Founda
Emerging Industry Special Funds of Guangdong Province
Guangzhou City (2010U1-D00221, 2011Y5000006).
addition, amino resin is chosen to increase the
crosslink density which improves abrasive resistance
and water resistance of coating. Mixed solvents con-
sisting of butyl acetate, PMA and xylene are also cho-
match the curing temperature of 180 C needed for
coating. Besides,butyl acetate and phorbol-12-
myristate-13-acetate (PMA) have good solubility to
the resin, and xylene helps reduce the cost of coating.
The characters of fillers directly produce effect on the
performance of coating, especially on the thermal
conductive particles. AIN, BN, BaSO, TiO, SiO and
glass powder are choosen as fillers. Properties of the
materials used in the experiment are shown in Table 1.
2.2 Characterization and measurement
Thermal conductivity is performed by means of
Hot Disk (Sweden TPS2500) and thermo-gravimetric
analysis (TGA) is made by use of a TGA analyzer
(SDTQ600, TA, USA) with a heating rate of 10
°C·min from 30 to 1000 °C under 5% O and 95%
N in volume fraction. Heat transfer experiment is
conducted with a small size heat exchanger.
2.3 Coating preparation
Silicon modified polyester resin, amino resin,
mixed solvent, BaSO4, TiO, glass power and AIN(BN)
are successively put into the container, then zirconium
bead weighing 1.5 times of the total components is
also put into the container, and they are separately
ground for 1 hour. Filter them out when the grain size
by 4cup).
is ≤30 μm, and adjust the viscosity to 1416 s (tested
Chin. J. Chem. Eng-, VoL. 22, No. 5, May 2014
Generally speaking, heat is transmitted from high
temperature to low temperature by the thermal motion
of molecules, atoms or free electrons in metal crystal.
However, for nonmetal crystal, the thermal conduction
mechanism is realized by the thermal vibration of the
crystalline grains. The thermal conductivity of metal
crystal is always higher than nonmetal crystal because
of plenty of free electronics existing in metal crystal
have been orderly rowed in crystallinc grains inside
but not in nonmetal crystal. However, those which
crystal also have good thermal conductivity. Resin
belongs to nonmetal crystal but does not have the or-
derly rowed crystalline, resulting in its very low ther-
mal conductivity ranging from 0 to 1 W·m'·K-
However, the thermal conductivity of resin can be
significantly improved by adding a certain amount of
tive chains or reticulation [8].
thermal conductive particles to form thermal conduc-
Making the coating into thin films, and testing
thermal conductivity of coating film through hot disk
test system. The measuring principle of Hot Disk is
based on transient plane source method (TPS). In this
method, Ni metal double helix sensor probe is placed
among two samples. The temperature of probe in-
creases when electric current passes through the Ni
probe, and generates heat diffusing from Ni probe to
the sides of samples. Heat diffusion speed depends on
the thermal conductivity of the properties of samples,
and thermal conductive efficiency can be achieved by
recording the temperature and the response time of the
probe. The schematic of hot disk test system is shown
in Fig. 1.
ity of coating and the mass fraction of BN fillers is
The relationship between the thermal conductiv-
shown in Fig. 2 (a). With the increase of mass fraction
of BN fillers and binder ratio, the thermal conductivity
of coating improyes. The thermal conductivity reaches
3.283 W·mK" when the binder ratio is 3, but the
influence of high binder ratio is still negative, which
seriously weakens other performances of coating, such
tance and flexibility. In addition, as shown in Fig. 2
as adhesion force, corrosion resistance, water resis-
(a), the increase trend changes when the mass fraction
of BN fillers reaches 30%. When the mass fraction of
BN transcends (is more than)>50%, it is a little dif-
ferent from the results reported by Zhou [6]. Zhou
used two kinds of thermal conductive particles in-
cluding SiN and AlsO; with different sizes, but we
uses BN as thermal conductive particles. The smaller
AlO; particles might hinder the contact between SiN
particles which causes low thermal conductivity of
composed materials. Fig. 2 (b) shows that the thermal
conductivity of coating consists of two different ther-
mal conductive particles such as AIN and BN. The
thermal conductivity of coating consists of BN parti-
cles is higher than that of AIN particles. The thermal
conductivity of BN particles is 250 W-mK, while
that of AIN particles is 70 W·m'·K'. The thermal
conductivity of coating discussed in this paper is
2.824 W-m-K with binder ratio of 2 and BN mass
fraction of 60%.
3.2 Heat transfer
performance of high-thermal
high-thermal conductive coating prepared, a heat
In order to test the heat transfer performance of
transfer experiment with a heat exchanger is carried
out. The surface of copper is coated and then A, is
defined as the thermal conductivity of coating, 4 as
the thermal conductivity of copper tube, X’ as the
 as the thickness of copper pope wall,  as the
thickness of coating, To as the temperature of interface
of coating and copper tube wall, T; as the outside wall
temperature of coating and Tz as the internal wall
temperature of copper tube. The schematic of coated
copper tube is shown in Fig. 3 and the schematic of
heat transfer experimental process and device is
shown in Fig. 4.
Figure 3 Schematic of coated copper tube
Based on the theory of heat transfer and fluid
heat conductivity, the change of temperature is con-
mechanics, it is known that in one-dimensional steady
tinuous and the heat-flow density q is constant.
cording to Fourier’s law, the following cquations is
Ac-
obtained [9, 10]:
The flow pattern of cold water in circular tube
heat exchange is forced convection and the heat trans-
fer coefficient of cold water can be calculated in ac-
cordance with Dittus and Boelter formula:
The heat transfer coefficient of hot water con-
densation is:
Figure4Schematrcotheattransferexperimentalprocessanddevice
The empirical Eqs. (1)-(5) are used to calculate
the results obtained from the heat transfer experiment,
the total heat transfer coefficient for comparison with
as shown in Fig. 5. The comparison of experimental
and theoretical results indicates that they match each
other quite well.
Comparsonotexperimmentalandtheoretirca
The effect of thermal conductivity of coating on
heat transfer performance obtained from the experi-
ment is shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen that the total
heat transfer coefficient increases as the thermal con-
mal conductivity of coating ranges from 0 to 1
ductivity of coating is strengthening. When the ther-
W·m′K-′, the heat transfer performance in heat ex-
change is significantly affected. When the thermal
conductivity of coating ranges from I to 2 W·m-K
the effect on the heat transfer performance in heat ex-
change is relatively weak. When the thermal conduc-
tivity of coating reaches more than 2 W·mK′, the
effect on the heat transfer performance in heat ex-
change is significant. Thermal conductivity of coating
There
heat transfer tube in heat trar
nsfer c
experiment. The firs
copper tubc
IS
coated
with
conductIve
Figure 6 Effeet of thermal
conduetivity of coating
heat transfer coefficient
Figure 7 The heat transfer coefficient of three copper
tubes under different flux
coating on the outer surface, which is prepared in this
on the outer surface.The third one is mooth tube with
article. The second copper tube is with fouling layer
nothing on the outer surface. The heat transfer coeffi
cient of three
copper tubes under
different flux is
shown in Fig.
7, which shows that the heat transfer
coefficient under different flux of the first copper tube
is close to the third copper tube, but it is much higher
than that of the second copper tube. High-thermal
formance of heat exchanger.
conductive coating can ensure the heat transfer per-
3.3 Heat resistance of coating
Silicon modified polyester resin is mostly used as
the matrix resin of high temperature protecting resin.
The main chain of this resin is SiO bond which has
difference is clectro negativity of Si and O atom,
higher bond energy than C—C bond. The significant
which enhances the stability of alkyl groups connected
with SiO—Si bond. The alkyl groups connected with
form of Si—O—Si bond, which can prevent the pri-
Si atom will be more stable when Si atom exists in
mary bond from fragmentation.
conductive coating. It is easy to find that the ignition
loss increases as increase of the temperature intensi-
fies. The ignition loss increases rapidly when the tem-
perature excceds 300 °C, where the organics compo-
nents in high-thermal conductive coating begin to de
the degradation of organic components almost stops.
The reason for this phenomenon is that the organic
components in the high-thermal conductive coating
are ablated when the temperature excceds 300
C
Figure 8 TGA of heat conductive coating
Table 2 Acid corrosion results
is to be fused, which is shown in Fig. 9. When the
 0g euxode oi  ose spoxo auneudu
all the organic components disappear. When the tem-
perature is about 600 °C, the fused glass powder and
SiO—Si bond remain unchanged [i].The tempera-
ture of fluid in ordinary metal heat exchanger retains
100 °C250 °C. So the high-thermal conductive coat-
tance used in ordinary metal heat exchanger.
ing described in this article has excellent heat resis-
3.4 Anticorrosion propertie:
The corrosion of heat exchanger in chemical
production process mainly includes hydrogen corro-
sion and oxygen corrosion, which can be solved by
the excellent anticorrosion coating with high thermal
conductivity and good heat resistance. Table 2 shows
the anticorrosion properties of the high-thermal con-
ductive coating described in this article. The coating
remains flawless and perfect after it is placed in acid
solution for 240 hours in such temperatures as 25 °C,
50 °C and 90 °C, and the adhesion force is in Grade 1.
In this paper, the grade of adhesion force ranges from
0 to 5.0 means the optimal value of adhesion force and
5 means the worst value.
CONCLUSIONS
(1) The coating of thermal conductivity of heat
exchanger is improved by adding thermal conductive
particles, and the thermal conductivity inereases with
increasing thermal conductivity and mass fraction of
thermal conductive particles.
(2)
Thermal
conductivity
af-
fects the total
1 coefficient heat transfer when the ther
uu-M 0Z U
K
Chin. J. Chem. Eng-, VoL. 22, No. 5, May 2014
This can be used as a reference when choosing the
coating for heat exchanger.
NOMENCLATURE
REFERENCES
Guan, Z.Z., “Study of high tempera
